
## Tarlf. Of Rtujhiit<:

l.l 
1.2 
Purpose 
llesЉrirition 
Presentation 
1.3 
,. A 
I, 
Codinfi of reiforn-.ance ClassЊficaticn 
Interchangeah11 
Hy oЋ Hask Assef!lb11es 
l.5 
Sal'll! CodinЌ 
Different Perfomance Cl 
assifica 
tlon Uumhers 
l 
.5. 
l 
l.5.2 
2. 
A[iDLYf'Am Ј nnr11untTc 
Compieteiy Aµpi i.,;aLie 
Partially Applicable 
General Design Rc:'-lu;, t,,;11n;11t:. 
2. 
i 
2.2 
... 
, 
Product 
Ueviations 
tЍaterials 
3, l. 
i 
3, l.2 
3.1.3 
General 
Facepfece 
ClЎanlng aml Sterll 
iziny 
Eiastomer COl!llonents 
Funqus (Inert) 
Dissimilar lletals 
MattH"iul SpecificЏtion 
3, 
1.3.1 
"I 'I
'\
" 
.;,, , . 
..,,, 
3. 
i.3.3 
J,1 .J.4 
3.l.3,5 
3.1.3.6 
., , 
') "7 
.., ... 
..,., 
3.1.4 
3. i .5 
3.1.6 
3, 
1.7 
3, 1 ,8 
3,l,9 
3. 
i. iO 
J. 
1.11 
3.1. 12 
3.2 
"·'·' 
tlorkmanship 
Finish 
Color 
lnterchanАcability 
t-!ciБht 
Deterioratiiin 
Service Life 
Rel 1abtl 1ty 
Identification lВarkin<Js 
Ootail rnnc:t 
... 
11rtinn Docp 
... 
ifri:tmAntc 
Dimensions 
Faceµ1 ece AssePib 
1y 
Fit 
Volume 
Resilience 
ValvГ !Jesign 
3,2.2,i 
3.2.2.2 
3.2.2,3 
3.2.2.4 
Attachment of Mask !:.us 
pens 
iun D2vi ca 
"I ') ') 
C 
""· ". 
, . 
.., 
Provhion for i'lttachment of Actuation Cord For Turnin9 On Oxygen Supply 
Mask Suspension• Device 
j.,.2.6 
3.2,J 
3.2.4 
-
- -
· · -
Actuation Cord For Turninn On Oxvnen Suoolv 
Gas !lag 
3.2. 
5 
3,2.6 
Tubing 
Performance Requirements 
Environmentai Conditions 
Stowane Confinuration 
Temperature arid llumidi 
ty 
j,J. 
i 
3.3. 
l.1 
3,3.1,2 
3.3.1,3 
J,J.1.4 
3,3.i.4.i 
J,J, 1,4.2 
r"t\rla"r.:af--il'\" 
Vibration 
ilesonaJJce 
llo Resonance 
J,..,,,,., 
3,3.2 
3.3.2. 
1 
'l ., ? ? 
..,, ........... 
3.3.J 
3. 
3.4 
3.3,5 
3,J,5,1 
"I "I C ') 
..J, .,,..,,c. 
3.3,5.j 
J.J.6 
3. 
3. 
7 
Orierational Serviceability 
Proc:nn+:1+;nn 
Altitude 
Low Ter·1nera ture 
[ndurance 
Sterilization 
Strength 
==:1:Y 
Ut:IIICI Q.I 
Gas Dag 
Udor 
Leakage 
3. 
3, 1.1 
Facepiece Total leakage 
GД:; Uag lЕakJgc 
Ureathing Resistance 
inward Fiow kesistance 
Outward Flow Resistance 
:!ask Performance 
J.3.& 
3,J,is, i 
J.3,8.2 
3.3.9 
3.3.10 

## Custodian: National Aerospace Standards Committee Procurement St-'T;.Жlt" **I\..A I** U .. 11I Oxygen ?--'..Ask Assembly, Passenger

N11tionol Stondords Association, Inc. 
.! 32-З F!l!..!!"tИo!r\th Street, N. W. 
'-"-•"'"ll'"", r,_,-_ 
                    20005 

OF CURRENT SHEETS 
LIST 
NO. 
REV. 
NO. 
REV. 
6 
l 
2 
R..:.""V. 
NO, 
, 
11 
.,_ 
2 
12 
0
"
0
2 
13 
7 
8 
9 
l 
i4 
1 
1 
1 
l 
l 
4 
1 
2 
1 
2 
'l• 
.J 
4 
5 
1 
15 
10 

## ""'-Iac: 117Q 1,R"._,. 11,V

SHEET 1 OF 15 
Copyright, 1977, **Aerospace** Ind1Jstries Association of America, Inc, 

## '!'Abie Op Con'!E!Iti! ( Llont1!!,-T!.) 4.

Qualifioation ⨨⨩at b7 the Kanu.i•gtUrer 
!!:: ⨭ Le:k:ge 
,l'G⨮·.t.u&iii.a11u,; .A'ilD 
....... 
,qs 
Fert'orm.anoe Anal;'&is 
E.stabl1.;..'. Orou."':.d tev.:l l'e:-:cr:cr.ee. 
Perfo:om:noe Te:t: "Bn (Hum.on SubJects at Altitude) 
Ila• a,.,,•,y•4 - U.♦l,,ul 
Arterial Blood (),cygen Saturation Method 
R•t:■h11 ah 'R1 
nntl n..-vg'!n ⨯•tu_⨰t:1nn "RJi"-A Line" 
PrM"du,,e 
Q⨱⨲⨳nteed Mi"imum PertQ⨴nce 
llold Teats (Ground level Pl'Baeure) 
Enduranoe Telit 
Teat. OniHiona 
Inspection by User 
Manutaoturer 1a Produotion Testa 
Strength Testa 
Flo11 Ree1etanoe 
Inward Flo11 Reaiatance 
Outward Flolf Re11iat11nce 
Performance 'r-e i,ta 
OLh⨵l· i'--ea\;&, 
Appl'oval 
POR N:'T.TV£RY 
f,l'.ask Sterilization 
fl4t,l'\l!irA1 TnRf:.J'1Jt\t::lnnR 
Deviat.ion• 
containers 
Packaging 
Jlarld.ng 
Inetrucition Tag 
Special llandlillg Procedure 
ff(EPAP.ATICH 
5fl 
5,2 
5,3 
5,4 
5,5 
5,6 
5,7 
5,8 

## List Of Abbrevla•I•Ions And Iefinitions

SYM!lOL 
Oxygen 
Carbon dioxide 
Nitrogen 
02 
002 
N2 
I,D, 
O,D, 
1pm 
Ineide di...,ter 
O\ltaide diameter 
Ll.tera per DU.mlte 
⨶d⨷ec:i o:qgen , 
_ 
_ 
. . _ . - 
- 
'J.'J.CUU. VOJ.\lme \ 
VOJ.\llml oi- one 11ln■.l■1fl.OnJ 
Re■piratoey minute ⨸0111me (volu,;;;; ureat11cr per 111ilute) 
StanYard tciii})cl 
... 
tW.--,1 *-,,a* :.,r,1■---⨹- d..⨺ 
r..:o,., '32on\ __ .:, .... 
£,. - u_, 
Tl 
KV 
STW 
llTP.S 
Bodj" temperatur..e and ⨻-eaaure 
•⨼urat;d, ur Dq1 ⨽c {SA.6':F) '⨾d⨿bient pree:su..-e] 
>rcr.aal tGmpG:.'iiti.w-; ;:md ;;re:;⩀⩁-e ⩂,. 
[2l°C \70 °**:o) and 760** = 
Hi] 
Added ox;;sen plu:: oxygen in '127 air 
l>o 
.... 
a 
.. 
+.ag,:,. ,.4- ⩃go."" h':" u,.,,_ """t:oinar1 1n r1,..,,. aa■o■ 

## Oxygen Mask A77L='Mri V, Pllssfnc.Er

Copyright; 1961, Aerospace Industries Association of America 1 Inc. 

Printed antl cii!iiiii>uied by; Nuiioua; Sicmclarcls A;;;Sockifo::.u, ho⩅. 

i3ia f¢uiieenih S1reei, N. '.'✓• 
Wosh.ingion 5, D. C. 

k e;⩺;!⩻ J⩼t ⩽ r : -;: a;u;⩾;9⩿!! 1⪀:;⪁ !e: !0;!;;⪂⪃⪄ir⪅⪆⪇⪈ 1 fw⪉;no⪊;⪋) :ii⪌ : 0il;;!tm1t8 
tubir
.g ror eor
-
"!eetion to the -,⩊gen !!Uppl,- e⩋uroe = The !'188EUnbly ehall be oapable ot being stowed suitably to !!!eet the ⩌qt
.!irem@n.t!! or it!! 1nt.end.8d U8e = 

1 ,3 
PRF.RENTATION - When nl"<!sehted. its immediate annlication shall be u obvioua as possible. The maak ahall 
beo11⩍able or quiok and eaay application. It ehall be UB!lble without special orientation. 
1.11 
CODING OF PERFORMANCE CLASSIFICATION - A pertorm11noe class1ticat1on n11111ber shall be Ueigned to each Claes 
or maake. Thie number i,hall correepond to the number auigned to the m1n1m11111 perrormance curve on the 
NAS Standard Drawing and llhall appear 1n the part can-out 11.e the tirn aaeh n11111ber fol.loving the NAS 
Standard Pal't number . Where the pel'rormaoce or a mask <Utters appreciai>lT tr0111 any of the minimilm pe;;tu=­
anoe ourvea e,:isting on the NAS Standard 1>i'a111ng, the proven performance curve for thiol mask may be added 
to yhe approp:r1a⩎⩏ N⩐ ⩑⩒⩓⩔rd Draw;ng. "thiB mask wo⩕d !⩖n-⩗--2!⩘⩙⩚⩛⩜--⩝--⩞r.rurmt1raoc claoa1t:1.oat1on 
nqmber correapona1ng ⩟o 1;n1a new perrormance curve on 1iRe nAi> .-:H;anaaru .&.1ra.,u.1qs, 
Example; 
MQ A,A,J,,.A-A.A 
11.uu..1,·-,;a.vua.a. uu\u,11fi⩠ a11 ""°l b.... desirable T 
⩡
L
I ______ Fertormanoa Claaait1cat1on 
⩢
'
 -------
⩣Apprcpr!cte U&<! <:'!-t:•ft 
......... 1>aflt T,⩤'D/'IUl,'lfl'\'E:"&'DTTTfflV np UACIV aQOG'lffH.TVQ 
nirr⩥,....n⩦ PA,..rn,,.,.Anr.e ClAAAi⩧lo•tlon Num⩨re (⩩mainde⩪ ot ⩫odirur the aame) - All masks with performance 
01eii.iriTBt.i;,!'l-;..llm;;;;,.. wh10h N'!ll1N oxygen riov rates leas than-the flow rates 11uppl1ed to the mask from the a1y,plane ayatem at all oertitioated cabin altitudes are interchangeable on that- airplane - 

## Applicabie Docidents

. 2. 
2 .1 
COMPIE⩬LY APPLICABIE - The 1'ollov1ng 11pec1r1cations, dravinge, and publ.ioat1ons or the issue in effect on 
the date 01' initiation or qualirtcation test, shall corm a p&l't or this specification: 

l'IIL-l:'•7l05 
Pipe Threads, Taper, Aeronautical National FQrm1 S;aibol Mn' 
MIL-5-7742 
Het:l: - n..._,,◄..,..4•-t 
...... ,.-,. n, 
•• 
-t 
... 
i l•n 
Fed⩭ral ⩮f'.•n"•"'" Nl"'I - 595 

G) 
(Deleted) 

!ill'.!!.• Additional NAS Standard PaJ.'t numbers will be added, 1r reauil"<!d, to cover newly approved masks or 
€u  u'. 
· 
-

2.2 
PARTIALLY APPLICAllIE - The rollowlng epec1t1cat1one, drawings, and publications or the 1eaue in etrec⩯ on 
the ,;late or initiation or qualification teats, ahall rorm a part or this i,peoir1oat1on to the extent noted 
in this doo11111ent: 

A .T.A. loo 
Speciticat1on tor iianutaoturer;e ⩰⩱chnioal Data 
Environmental ⩲
⩳ating1 Aeronautical ami AaaooiateU EqW.pqont, Gen8ral 
5peoiiioai;ion 

--.;oi::cl ;;.;-,cl cli⩶l1ibuiccl by; Nulkmu! :;i,mcl..:u⩷ J.;j::iv.::;;iuii⩸h, :u.i:;-
. 

J3J5 fou1teenih Sirnei, N. W. 

'
NuiMrig1u11 S. D. C. 

MAt"riale - 

Ol!neral - Mater1alll llhall be ot t:,pe, grade, and qual1t7 vh1oh e:zpet"ienoe 1od./or teata ha-.-.. demo«atra⪏d 
to be auitable tor the purpose intended, fllateriala shall not be uaed widoh ouut■;;1n;te VXJSGW er ar= 
attected advereely by oont1D11ou1 eerv1oe v1th o:icygen, Hate.ri■la ahall llue at leaat :1--reaictant propertiea ae apeo1t1ed 1n t!M applicable vivil Air msgiiiat1oua, Facepieoe - The tacepiece aball be fne of <.1'1Jeotlouiible vd.vt>o, Mater-1:l:s 1.
-i
 eont:ot with !!kin !!h!!ll be 
ae1eoted to be nonallergenio ■nd nonl⪐r1tat1ng, 
3,1,3,3 
Cleaning and Sterilizing - T'ae uak .i>All be made ct -.ateriale vbioh will permit olesning and ater11ization 
without adVBrDi c.iieuta and ;.1thout ⪑1aaar;c:'til=,. The :.ethod of ol4!e?!.ll'
..s and 11tez-1lizing ah.Ill be reoom.­
mcndud b:, the uak liaifUt'ao 
tu.-er. 
Elastomer- CQmponcnta - All elo.atomer msteri!l!! used in the mask ahall have been manutaotured not aore than 
12 mvntho pr-1c⪒ tc the del!ver;r d.at⩭ ⪓! the ⪔8k exotpt those aateriala *tor* which a longer period haa 
proven :caaible. 'l'he date ( 
quart..,,. and year) th" el⪕atomer waa cured aball be permanently and leg1bly 
at=:a;,cd c:, e"eh :;,a!'t !!!th !! !!\!it!!ble ink. The lite expectation or the el■etomer vhiob baa the llhorteat 
reuining Hl'vioeable Ute shall govern the lite expectancy or the maak asaembly. 
3 ,1,3,5 
Pllh..
"lls (IMrt) - Components shall be t'llng1111 proofed by eeleotion to the greatest extent Pl'aotio6ol• or 
p⪖rt8 1nd ll!!ltf!rial• that are non-nutrient to tw,gua, or b7 treataent ot the parta and 11■teriala prior to 
their use. 
3,1 .3.6 
Diaaimilar Metals - Unle11 suitably p'l'Otected against eleotrolUic oorroBion, d1Daliiiilar- -etalu ;:;hall =ot 
be 11aed 1D intimate contact with eacn other, (Reterenae KS535oG) 
V3,l,3,7 
l\ 
Material Spec1r1oat1on - 1ne material specification or all parts or thia uok ccoemblT aball ⪗ oubllitted 
tor approval to the procuring aoti-.-it,-, 
workmanship - ⪘
ne mask Bhall ba rabrlQatcd aud t!ni⪙
⪚
⪛⪑ in ccccrd:;⪜ee ⪝!th th⩭ Mg.
⪞⪣⪟t !'Mid• pr$ot1ae 1n 

3,1,4 
the manu1·aoture ot thiB tn,e ot eqt4pmeut, The tin!ahcd =ock end all int-e?;'?l.81 part" 1tht1ll be clean through­
out and inset or .C.l.ns, bi.iFra, auale, oila, s.nd all =te:-ial: ⪠h!.ch !!!.!g..
lit !.dverMly t1(teot the l!l&te operation 
of the Wa&k. 
3.1,5 
Finish - All matcr!clc which are not 1.
n
_
l-terent1y oorronion reBi11tant shall be !"1n1ehed with a protective 
tr⪡atmcnt or coc.tin& to !tltl.m.12⪢ the ⪣r!'eot of ⪤Xpne⪥ to the environnental aond1t1ona whioh may be 
cnccur.tered 1n th• ae:rvioe ror wh\oh the elJlllpment 1• intended, 'l'he protective treatment or ooat1ng 
ch⪦ll net ⪧hi⪨• flak⪩., or :polfde.-,. or otherwise cont81111nate the maak. 
3.,1.,6 
⪪• The oolor or the taaepiece ehall be No, 13538 yellow ot Federal Standard No, 595, 
3,L7 
InterchsruteabilitY - All parts having the eame man11taaturer•e part number shall be directly and euwpletely 
Interohangeebie 111th each other with respect to 1netallat1on, pel:'tormanae and aafei;,-, 
3.1.8 
WeiAAt - The weight ot the maek aese1Dbly Dhall not exceed the value ahown on the appi'vpr-iate :::.s Standsrd 
Drawlng. 
3.l.,9 
Det!lr_1orat1on - Deter1oration or corrosion of any oomponent whioh uould in aty :ar.ner prevent the equ.J.pment 
trom meeting operational requirement& during t5al:·vloe llt'e shall prvy!dc » 
.. 
;en tc ccn:1de⪫ the '!qUip1n⪬nt ⪭!! 
having railed 'tO meet the requiremento or thlD epec1t1cat1on, 
3.1.10 
Service Life - The &erv1oe lite ot the article o.!'tcr delivery to the proouring !!gency BMll not be less than 
vm: VII.LUC Dpi:Uit'ivd t,y thv iiWUii.!"aotU...
""'C:" ef the =:!3k. 

3 .1.11 
llel1ab111ty - noliable oper.:t!en :h:ll be e !!!ejo!' .,on!i,,e,.11:t:ion. l!Ven 111'ter long ⪮rioda ot inattention 
durir.g otowcsc 1..
wi
 ciror41tt and/or during its shelf life ⪯ 

i 
3.l,12 
Identitioat!on .-•rkir,
2
⪰• - TM t<>Uowing intormat1on •hall be dl8rked on the 011taide ot the article ua1ng 
⪱ter!ei!! !!nd/n!" pro⪲eB!!$8 t™'t vill ensure legibility du.ring the expected lite epan of the article . 
The 
marking shall not oauoe amudging or dboolol:'lltion ot the article, 

•. 'l'he vorda "Oxygen Haak" 
b, 
Manuraoturel:'1a Part lfulllber 
| o -                                             | .                       |
|-------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| ci,                                             | ⪳ notation =NAB AA.U-il |
| '°'                                             |                         |
| (with apprbpt•iltc MS St■u.⪴r-d rar-t N•⪵r :.r- |                         |
| .d                                              | -,-..                   |
| •)                                              |                         |
- •  ⪶laetomer ount daW (ace i'a1•G⪷i,ph 3.1.3 - 
.!;.) 
f. 
i=iot\u-ii (oce Far-agl"aph 3.3.l2) 

1 1 1  
.7 
SHEET 4 
Copyright, 1961 , Aer ospace Industries Ass ociation 0£ America , Inc .  
Pt1n1ea and Cisuibuied by;_ NaHonui Siun<lu,J..:; A35oc1aUuu, foe. 

ljlS" fou1ieenib Sil{C:i, N. \"/, 
·vvoshingion 5, D. C. 

3.2.2 
Facepiece Asser.i>iy -
3. 
2.2.1 
Fit - The faceuiece shall be of a sufficient rMi l il!nce. ށh" ǀn,I shǀ"" t.n rnnfn.-m ,.,..,1n u tn •••"""'° 
- 
-
-
- - - - - - - -
,. 
-
--
----
··-r -
-x 
--·· - - - ··· - --- - • .1 
•-
-y•• -""" 
facial contours using no more pressure than suppނted by the tl-'Sk suspension device. 
Vol ume - The chanber jorned between the face and the &111sk shaii at ai i times be of a m1n1mum vol ume. 

3.2.2.3 
Res11 1ence - The. r,iain bodv of the mask shal l be sti ff enounh tn min1"'h" defoރtfon """ t.n inrnr,...rt 
handl ing, which mi!Jht resul t in reduction in opera 
tin" perfol"l!lance. · --
Valve Design - Valves, ;,
+.ere use.1, shal l be designed to offer ne9l iqihl e  resistance {Reference Paraoraph 
3.3.8) to i nflow of oxygen and al'lhient air durinq inhaiation, anrl to outflow of used air during exhalation, 

3.2.2.5 
Attachment of Mask Suspension Device - Provisions shall bf !'lade on the facep1eee for attaehinQ a mask 
suspension devfce. th@ !tt!chment of wh!ch !hal l nat restrict the orientބticn of tha ޅ
ކއk. 
rruwia1on for Attachވ
މnt or Aetuation Cord For Turninq un uxyފen Suppiy - Prov1 s1on sna 1 1  De made where appl icable for the attachment of a ribbon or a cord to turn on the oxygen supply. Thi s  cord must be capable of wi thstanding a pul l of l o  pounds. 

3,2.3 
f.fask Suspension Device - A simple mask suspension device sha1 1 be provfded !? 
... 
h2ld!34 567 
}"!!ދ ތލ-ގhޏ­
uscr1s fice. The dev1ސe iha1 1 have such dfmensions and el astic propertiei 1.ruu. 1 1.  cen r1U 1 u  ""ޑ 1no,;ޒ w 
the face w1 thout adjustment and at the same time i t  shai 
i present minimum discomfort to the wearer. A 
simpie means for adjusting the ti ghtness of the mask shail be provided. The suspension device shall be 
stowed on the faceuiece in a manner such that i t  wil l  not interfere wi th autn!1li!t1c oresentation of the 
.ask asseuiJly where so presޓnted. with hand-held usage, Or with !1orffla1 -operat1on Of tht!-ޔSk. The mask 
shall ren2;in service:ޕle in i ts :tcޖޗd configurޘtio" wntil i t i s  required fur i ts speci fic appl ication. 
Act!Jatioޙ Cord For iurninq On Oxygen Suppiy - ihe actuation cord, when used, shal l conf<inn to the app11cable part of the appropriate IIAS Standard Part. 

Gas Dag {Where Used) - The gas bag, where used, shall be attached to tޚޛ facepiece and tubing with 
sufficient strength to wi thstand a pull force in any J1 rection of 5 pounds for three secondޜ and 
r.ޝde of tiexlhi e l'ldteriai which wii i  coii apse when not in use, The qas baqisi shal l have the· 
foi lowing minimu"1 and max1mun capacity when inflater! to 0,5 inch of water positive pressure: 

Reiervoi r 
1,ono 
i ,500 
Rebreather 
80() 
1 ,000 

3,2,6 
Tubing - The oxyqen supply tuho 1o1h;rh i t  to he usޞd for conncctinr: the mask assembly to the oxygen supply 
scu:"cc :tuޟn be l ight in Wi;ight. ar.J sha11 bt: adequate fof its 1utemied U5e. The l.ublti!l shaii be juiiy 
flex1ble wl th1n a temperature range of -29°C (-20°F) to 7i °C (i60°fj , ihe tubing shai l be capabl e of being 
iient to a 0.5 i nch mean radius for stowage purposes with l ess than a 5:; restriction to flow. 
3.3 
PERFORMA:lCC RCQUIREf-1:UTS - Unless otherwi se specifie.J t al l flow requireޠnts rޡfer to vxyyen. 
r:nviionmental Condi tions -

3.3.i.i 
Stowage Configuration - The mask asseuvly including the supply tubinq shall be capable uf beino stowed in 
such a manner as to be ready for i ts intended use . Thޢ naxi1,1u1n stowage envelope shal l Ile as shown on the 
appl icable UAS Standǁr,J llrawtnޣ. ;1hǂrǂ mask i s  to bǃ autor.1atica1ly prǃsented, the mask ޤhal l fall fޥely 
from an inverted rig_id box of the envelope dirr.ensions to dei1i0nstiate compliance. 
iemperature anu iiumiuity - ihe asser:i!iy shai i be capabie of beino stowed at temperatures of 71•c (i60°F 
for 1 20 hours and -55"C (-67"Fi for 2 hours , at relative hu111idities varvina from 5S to 95ަ. without 
adversely affecting subާequent pިrfnrmǁީce after return to no!"!'!!l terop!!!"at,!rު.. 
3.3. 1 .3 
Vibration - in its stowed confi9uration the equipmP.nt shall be capable of withstanding vibrations as fol lows: 

3, 3. 
1 .4.1 
Resonance : One Mi l l ion cycles or 8 hours . whichever occurs first, at each resonance occurrino wfthi n the 
frequency ran!?e. of Fi qure 1 .  (\.!here ޫcveril.1 resonances are encountered the vibration periods may then be 
1 1rn1ted to those resonances considered roost l ikely to r,roduce iaii ure. j 
j,j, 
i .4.2 

iio Resonance: one m1l 1 1on cycles in each of three 111utual l v  oernend1cul ar directions . 3t 100 cvcles per 
second and the correspondinެ ar,pl i tude bf F1!!Y!'e 1 ,  
· 
· 
-

3.3.2 
Upcrationa1 Serviceabil i ty -

Presentation - After exposure to any or tne cono1t1ons of Paragraph 3.3.i the 111ask asserrbly, 1ncl ud1ng 
supply tu1J1119, shal 1 be capable of beinq prP.sented from t ts stoued confiquration and meetinq the performance 
requi rements specified h11rein. 
- · 
-
-
____ 
,_, 
__ -----··--
-L----'--
ZU\IUCl l  l"'I C:t[\11 C \.IIQll'4C:t from sea 1ewe1 tu at 
A1 ti t:.:de .. Ovcr=:11 cp.:rޭtion shu.11 Le Siitfsfuctory fo11oiifnޮ 
least the ii.a;dmum altitude fur whi,h approval is desireU. 

3.3,2,3 

Low Temperature - After the .temperature of the mask asseޯl v in its stowed confiauration has stabil ized at 
appruxlnately 21 °C ( 71 °F) . the assembly shal l he capabl e of- foJ:1P.diate and satisfactory operation when 
S!..
11Jder!ly exposed to -40°C (.,..40°F) fer : m1ni:::um period cf 5 :.dm.;tްs. 

Er,durc1oce - ii,e "'a•ޱ a••emoiy shdii iie capahic of satisfactory operation to a minir,um of 50,000 simulated breathing cycies at an approximate rate of JO cycles Per 111inute, at a oeak del iverv rate of 70 1pm STPU 
for 10', of the Inspiration time ,  and at 30 1 pm  STPD for go,: of th" i nspfrat1on time. 

3,3,4 
Sterilization - ·.1ne 11rtialo eiial.l be uapable ot lieir
ag aubJooted to the Qlva⪼ an4 atcr!:Li:icaticn t⪽a.tment 
reooamena.co uy the manutautw.r
-ei=, id.thuut diaacu;embl;r **ar.d** ;;ith r.c ad.ver⪾ cttecta, 
A:⪾;bl;; .. Vhen e".:.pporte⪿ et the inlet ⫀nd _ot th⫁ o::r.:;yg⫂n eupply tubi!'
.S; the Af!Mmbly M.ftl;l. •1tb.8tsnd⫃ 
w1tho::.t damage, a atatio load ot 20 pounds applied 11t the taoep1eoe to-,, - pedod ot three uoonda. 

Oene-,,al - All ooo,ponenta ot the 11rtlcle ahall be !'ea1atant to tea-,,a, enaga, and all other deteote leading to 
⪔lfl
.!.

1'Gt!.on Qf tM utida, which lllight be oauaed by rough handling dlll'in8 ita urvioe lite . 

O11a Bag - The gaa bag when uaed ahall be oapable or w1thatand1Jlg 1 psi 1.ntel'lllll gage preall\ll'e W1th0\lt damage . 

3,3,5,3 
2!!!!!: - Ho obJectionable odor ahall be peroeptible to the user or the mask, 
3,3.6 
3,3,7 
)'..e11g6!, -
3,3,7,1 
Pacepiece Total Leakage - Tile tacepiece total leakage, 1noluc11Dg peripheral leakage when the uek is worn, 
llhall be a 11l.DlJ1111111, 
Uaa Bag Leakage - i.-
nere wsed⫄ tho gaiJ Dag iuoluding oonrtouit1oni, to the ravvpieov an⫅ iii.
i)pl7 t"
ɟ!:-..; tm=ll 
have no detectable leakage •hen preaa\U".1zt1i;i. to 3,C 1nohea ot ;.ater, 
Bre&th1f"lg Ren1Btimce ⫆ 
3.s.a 
Il'1war
-d P.loM Roai;stance .. The auction w!th!r. the m:::k =..
'lall not- exceed o .60 !noh⫇a ot water wh•n th$ 
⫈.-'-
.alu. 
... 
••- t"---- _ 
..... c ... 3n l:= C!l1'i>T\ •• g•,._u.,,. 1Atta.1 ⫉"""1⫊1"""• •"" ⫋,.,,.,. •11 AT1)Ant.ed nrv11ten 111.1nply tlow 
rate::. At an 1X'
-
"
.elat1on !lo" ?"ate or 70 1pm **the euotion 111th1n the meek oh11l1 not eltoeed** 1.2 1.nchea or 
'f⫌ter 
.. 

Ó! 
Veluee up to Q,8o !!lld 2.0 inehea of' vatar ma:v be used in olace ot *0 ,60* and 1.2 1nohea ot water 
""•paotively wheN teat data tor an individual 111118k inclicatee theae values to be aatiataotO1'7 trom 
the Wier' -  atandpoint. 
3,3,s.2 
outward Plow Reeiatance - The preaalll'e bllild-up within the mask shall not exceed o,Bo 1nch ot water when 
disohar@l1.ng a flow or 30 1pm **STfD at ground level conditions, At** 70 1pm tne pre1111111'8 build-up ahall not 
exceed 2,0 inches or water. 
3,3,9 
llaek Pe-,,rormance - It 18 the 1ntent of thia apecit1cation that the naak aeeembl)', a" uaed b)' wl1.r
,dootr1natod 
a1r11ne passengers will be able to maintain during inapiration mean tr$ohc:t:t,l OAYgen pa:rt16l jiI"
-ViiiiwX
⫍a at 
least ae great as thoae specified in tile appropriate Civil Ab· Regu.l&tlons, when the iliiDk :1.a oon.
-
.eoted to an 
oxygen source which euppliea oxygen at the iluw 1.·&teti wh1uh ha.ve bean ⫎etei'iu1.nad to ⫏ r
.aoGGiUi-7 :or the 
particular mzusk 11asDe1Dbl7, T"
neae required i11nlmum tluw 1⫐ates cu;--e speo1tied or
, the app⫑opr!cte HAS St1'nd:&rd 
Drcniing, 

3.3.ll 

certified '1'!>8t ll•!'o-,,t11 - '}'he nanutaature-,, or hia authorized -,,eoreaentative ahall submit rolll' ( 4) copiea ot 
a oertitied test !'epo1't showing compliance with th1s apeo1t1cation to-,, approval to the procuring activity. 
Qualification data shall be turniahed prior to or oonclll'rently with the delivery or the rirat 11111ak, 
3 ,3.11.2 
Bid Data Draw1nge - Manutact\11'er1a drawinga ahowing the detail design or the 11111ak aaaeml>ly being proposed 
in accordance with thia apec1t1oat1on shall be turn1ahed by the 11111nurectll1'8r With h1s bid, 
In addition, 
schematic drawings ot the mask operation shall be l'llrni■hed w1th adequate descriptive material to tacil1tate 
the 1natallat1on or the mask, 
3,3,11.3 
Engineering Data - A maak outline dra"ing for inaliBllat-icii bhiill LIU aubri.lttca .tor- iiPVi"VYcil to th.ii i,i'"oOur-11
-e 
activity, 

| Manw;.ls - The wam.itauturei"' shall turniDJ                                             |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| a                                                                                        |
| reproducible =e:ter to cover m.e!.ntenanoe.                                              |
| Vf,6-l'ation, o.-,d )'Arts per- ATA :-:c. lCC, ⫒1th d.at⫓ tc co-:cr e-:e:"'h⫔cl p;-oce⫕⫖ |
| -e snd eerv!a.:!.!".g ..                                                                 |

m.... ..... m-... 

s---
a,: A ............ p-"'a 
...... "'···" ..... ⫗l,,,,a ⫘ 
...... ·"'"' +:ao:a+:t.-.o -⫙tannP an.1111-I f"-1,,,1 hv t:hA 11n4n,tfi411.-t::,.on and plS?'-'\ed to demon!!trs.te oompl!ance with the !'!'qu1re⫚nt" of the 8.PPlicable epec1t1cst1on ah.all be prepared b;r thɠ ⫛
⫝̸nu!"ei:?tu..

⫝?-.. The t-'!!!t ,roer⫞m !!h⫟11 f)On"ist of ⫠- r.mnwn⫡ry or th⫢ teats to be eonduated. an itemized list of t"et.s and t
..,st:l.ng se'l"ennee to be pet'tol'll1ed, snhenatios or test set-up tor eact> speoifio test and a M!!!plete H!!t of te⫣t A'J111pment to be utilized eho11ing nanufactlll'er, part number, and acolll'B0Y and reaponse time ot unit. 

Specification teats 11hich the nanutaotll1'91' :llltends to omit on the basis of aWlarity with previous teats shall be noted, Copies or the test program shall be submitted for approval to the proclll'ing 

3,3,ll,6 

## Oxygen Assembly, Passenger

Piin!ed and **disl(ibuted** by: Notional Standards Associolion, Jnc. 

1315 Fourteenlh Street. N. W. 

Washington 5, D. C. 

## 4. Ooality Assurance Prjv15100S 4.1

QUAI.IFICATIOtl TEST **BY THE** HA/IUFACTURER - **The** manufacturer shall perform or cause to be perfonned ttle tests wverwd by this spee1f1eat1cn for 1n1t1:1 qu:1 1ficat1cܢ of the mask. Any of th@ t@sts rtqu1rܣd by th1$ 
specification which have been perfonwd on .1m11ar units .

..

 , be ܤ
"itted, prcvfded that the vendor shall show 1n the test rtport quai ified proof of similarity and of performance of iiK:h teiti, including appl l­
cabfl ftv of such tests. Teܥts called for 1n Paragraphs 4 , 1 .2 through 4.1,4 incl usive shill be run on 1t least five different 1111sks. Tests called for in Paragraphs 4.1.5, 4.1 ,6, 4,1 .10 and 4.1.11 shai i be run on at liast one ܦ•ܧk. Fer tests called tor in Paragreph 4.1 .7 1t least t@n.l'Msks wfl l  bܨ u1ed. Each t1st 
1111sk sh•l l be representative of production units and shall be individually Identified. 

!f rftlllrkina of the mask or anv corroonent part should be required to complete any of the tests called for in this specification, the manufacturer shill repeat all tests previously run, or certify that sa1d rework docs not ;ffact prier rr:uit: cbt:1ned. A st!tement of al l rework performed on the !'IIISk or i ts components during quti if1catlon testing arܩ the necessity for rework shall be incl uded ,fn the qua1 iffcet1on test report, Whenever 1xt1ns1ve rework ;s necessary to compiet1 the test program a rerun or the qua11f1cat1oܪ test pro;rܫm usina a n11sk assel!i>1v incorooratlnn all rework features shall be required to obtain final approval **fl'OM** the procuring activity. -
. 

.. 

Test Conditions - 
4.1.1 
U,l,1 
GH - The aas used in testlnq the 11111sk. **shal l** he either OXY!len conforming to Specifica-tion **iiil-0•925** Grade A, 
or-water pumped nitrogen conforming to Speclfleatfon MIL-ܬܭ601 1 ,  or water pumped air equ1vaient 1n dryness 
tu Spac1f1cat1on MIL-U&501 1
_ 
nftrc;en. !f nitrogen or !1r 1s used. appropriܮte density eorrect1on factors 
shil l be applied to the flow meter used, 
4. 
1. 
1 .2 
Prassure and Temoerature . Whenever the pressure and t11operature existing at the time of the test are not 
definitely specified, It shall be understood that the test wil l  be made at atmOspheric pressure of 1pproxi­
ܯ•t.e1y 29.92 incܰ
.cܱ of ܲrcury at a ܴܳm t..
-mper!ture of !pproximately 21 °C (7O'F)! All flow measurements 
shal l be corrected to liters per minute STPD. 
4.1.1.3 
Vfbration ·•nd llohes - Excessive noise, v1brat1on, fl utter, or chatter of any part of muk .ssܵly occurdnv 
during op@ration of the mask shall be cause for rejection of the mask. 

## Test For Leakage -

4 , 1 ,2.1 
Gas Baa Leakaoe - Seal off the qas baq connection to the mask and apply at ieast 3.0 in, H20 pressure to the 
i,te	itf
1ܶ1
ܷ:ܸ ! ܹܺb!ܻܼ;r 1ܽ
ܾ!;ܿ݀݁1 be no detectable leakage when tested w1th bubbie sol ution or 
int for Fiow Res1shtl<:f -
4.1 .3.1 
Inward Flow Resistance - Seal the periphery of the facep1ece of the mask to an appropriate r1xture wn1cn 1s 
ctp!݂l@ of produ݃1ng sYCtion within the mask and measure this suction and the suction flow rate. Plug the 
oxygen supp1y tube. Adjust the suction flow rate to 30 1pm and measure the suction inside the facepiece. 
Thi iiiCt1utt s݄݅11 nut ehceed C.60 i nch vf w■ter. The s݆ct1cn ,h݇11 not =݈::ed 1 .2 fnche! of w!ter when the 
test h repeated with a suction flow rate of 70 1pm, 
V1l ues up to 0,80 and 2,0 inches of water may be used in place of 0.60 and 1 .2 Inches of w1ter respectively where test data for an individual mask indicates these val ues to be s1t1sf1ctory fro,n the usar•s stindpv1nt. 

4, 
1 ,3,Z 
Outward flow Res1stance - Seai off the per1pnery of the tacepiece of the mask. connect the oxygen suppiy 
tube to the test gas snurce through an appropriate measur1n݉ device. Adjust the flow to 30 1pm and measure 
the differential pressure between the interior of the facep!ece and the ant.lent. This d1ffe!'f!nt1a1 pressure shall m;t axceed 0.8 fnch Qf water. Repƽ݊t. test ݋t 70 lp;!; f"!cw. Thi݌ d1ffe:"'ent1a1· pressuݍ !hall not eY.eݎݏd 
2.0 inches of water. 
Str•nath Tests -
-
4.1 .4 
ܠ .. - , -.. , 
ܡ,.  
... 
,. .. 
M1sk Assimh1y Strength Tƽstđ - Support thݐ ݑ.::k -:ݒ:tmb1y by the 1n1et =ݓd ef t.
"!e oxygeƾ !upp1y tub@ and 
apply - ݔtݕtic_ fo,:cݖ of 2ݗ P<!"ݘݙs to the facep1eݚe. for a per1od_o!.thݛee sec'!nݜs. W1.th_ thݝ. mask assݞly 
supported by tne 1n1et end of the oxyݟen supply tuDe, 1pp 1y a static rorce or ݠ pounas ݡo ݢne reservu1 r  
bag for - !)f!rlod of three Sl!conds. Support the mask assembly by the facepfece and apply a static force 
of 5 pounds to the bag in an axial direction, and at 45° and at 90° angll! to the axial dlN!ctlon. The 
ݣ•sk ■đ;ernb1y rnust đMffer no d;ݤݥ;c wh1ch wf11 ݦdver:ely affect subseݧuent oper!tion. 
Gas Sag Strength Tests - Seai off the passage bet
_ ·ween the gas bag and the f■cepiece of tne mask, .and apply 
a pressure of 1 psi to the bag, through the oxygen supply tube, for a period of three seconds. The gas bag 
must suffer no damage whfch will adversely affect subsequent operation. 

## Ttfj!!Riturݨ Expoiure Teits -

4.1 .5.1 
Low Te1111erature - With the aas baa folded and the tubing havfng at least one i80" bend of 0,5 inch radlu5, 
th• Nik shill be st1b11 1ted at ,-temper1ture of -ss•c (-67°F) for a period of two hours and subjected to 
r.-CH"';irݩ1 = 
::r!:1cnt tݪݫݬ:r:turc for : fݭrther period of one hour. The mast 1sh!ll then be teݮt,d 1t roOft1. 
tlmp!riturݯ ݰ•r P1r19rݱpݲs ݳ.1 .ݴ,througݵ ݶݷ, •ݸ: *r:n* cloݹݺ vfsua1 1nspectfon the mask 4s:cmbly shal l show 
no SliTII or a1m1ge or aeter1or1i10n, 1no ݻne **rIex10Ie** port1uns shai i show nu apparent change 1n f1ax1bf1 1ty. 
The tubing must straighten easily and must not crack, st1ck closed, or have an abnormal restriction to flow. 
H1gh Temper!ture = With the gas bag folݼerl and the .tubf"g h!v1ng at l@!!t oݽݾ 1ao• b@nd of 0ݿ5 fnch radiusހ 
the ri•sk shall be stab111zed at a temperature of 11 •c (lSO•F) fer a period of 120 hours and subjected to noF'fflli room aDient temperature Tor a further perlod of one hour. ihe ށ
aik iha11 then be tasted at n:;om t8111per1ture per Paragraphs 4,1 ,Z through 4.1.4. Upon close visual inspection the mask assembly shill_ ނރow no signs of 411'119@ or deterioration, and th@ fl@xlble portions shal l show no apparent change In flex1b1 1 1ty. 

The tބb1ƾg ޅu!t str!1ghten eas11y end mi ist nކt crack, !tick clos@d. or hav@ an !bnormat އވtrtctfoo to flowމ 
1:l:li fourteenth Street, N. w. 

Washington, D. C, 2000ތ 

h .1.6 
V!brs.tion Teet ... Set up the mask for a vibration te:t 1:t!t.h the =:clc i.
"'l the cpprcp:,iate rigid bcx atcwase 
contlguratlon sholfl'l on the approp⫬iate N.⫭s Standard Drawing. 
In eech. or three mutu.elly perpcndicUlar 
jo
S;.e 
T;Ui1VW: :;:iX:"YZ ;;:[; \] 
,.
Ro;
11
:a:P:Q: :;;;;;:
+.
J::;8K;•Lr:MN=O0;
BC;;;:·
1";0%' 
n;:t!D!E
!e F" GH":a:I
hours; .,hiohever ooo\U'B f"ir⫮t., at the emplitu.de" ehmm in P1gi.L
T"e 1. !;!id Ln t!'hiohev⫯r direot!.on the 

reaonanoe wae obaerved. Ir no reaon.enl:!e11 a:rt1 tound within the trequ_l!!lne7 rang• 9t PJ.gure 1., vibrate the 
mask at 100 oYoles ner second and the correaoondiru,: molitude or FillllN l .  ror one million ovnlaA 1n eAe.h 
direction, 
· 
· 
· 
-
- 
-
· - -
-
--- ·• -
-
- -----

11 ,1,7 
Perrormanoe Teats "A" - The performance or the mask shall be established by tirat determinillJIC a typical tit 
leaKBge vaiue on representative human aubJeota, and then testing the mask on a breathing maoh1ne which can 
oonaiatently produce the minute volumea and tidal volumes specified 1n the appropriate CiVil- Air Regulations, 
liuman Sui>JectB ('l')'Pical ⫰it Leak Valuej - A typioal raclaJ. nt J.eaK vuue anul be <1eter1111.ne11 by testing 
maake on at lea■t 75· randomly eeleoted peraona or both aexea who are inexperienoed 1n the use of oxygen 
equ.lpmunt . Stslaotidn ur peraonn for iitn,t p⫱o15c11 &hall be made i⫲om the public at random, with effort l>eing 111114<> to enew,e a wide var1.,t1on 1n tac1al contoure and to include both aexea and varioua age gr0upe 
iu •l'.-,,.v,.,,i.....,u-,1.,1 tucs .1.vllv"iu,. ⫳,.·u,i:;u\l■JSll;:Di 

"'' 
\C'.I 
3 
3 
5 - 15 
15 - 25 
7 
9 
12 
25 - 45 
39 18 
over 45 
9 

Teat Methoda1 Teat at laboratory ambient oondit1ona udng a teat rig capable or applying auction to the maaK, and 1n<1icating pressures at the mask aa well aa providing data ror determining •lllf leakage rlowa arising tl'Om the tit· or the mask to the race, The teat rig ahollld not a1gn1t10ant11 affect mask tit or pertormanoe . 

, 
. ..  
- ... ,.. 
........ , - 
.1..c:; 
B:i•ie.L"irig;; I;r.i.ting Dhull 11imu.late 1u1 oioeely as practical but be no more detailed than that expected to 
b9 given ptuu1enge1⫴a 1n olr uarr.i.er operation. Suoh briefing DhoW.d inolude et le■Dt the tallowing 
i»DtF
v.⫵tioiiai 
O ⫶ AdJu⫷t !'!1!\!!k me.nuslly t◊ fit th!!' f!.⫸-⫹: DY.Aft. h,+.n ,:r,,v,..- n,-. nnt.n n♦. h - 
.,. nnTtHnn• nft t:h• fa⫺e duri...
"lg 
e;ic:hal&tion indicsten. e, poor tit⬜ 
The aubJeot shall not be given additional inatruotione, information, or aid or any lc1nd other ⫻han to 
instruct the aubJect to inhale and hold hia breath, 
Test ReaUlts1 
Reoord mask preHurea and leakage flow rates wh1oh exiated while the 11ubJect was holding 
4 ,1,7.1,3 

his breath, and then evaluate tor 1 ,0 inch ot water auotion in the mask, The values obtained on all 
individual! 11uat be reported and only one teat per individual shall be permitted, Mask leak value including 
mask peripheral leakage 11eterm1nat1on snaJ.1 be maae 1n aocoraance wi 
tll OOIIllllOnlJ accepted procedures, The 
!al⫼• o⫽ t⫾e 
.⫿e⬀k rate ••⬁o⬂ wh⬃ch_ 95;<> ⬄r. the ⬅•at reaUlta_ rap ahall be tne typical 10111<: vuue ror tne 
waaK isr1u am1J..1. uu n:por,;;t:u in t,ne "CeBt:. aat;a anu t,esli repor&\ SJ . 
Br⬆athi1
-e; ::'
.aGhL
'1e Teati1 with Typical Pit Leakage - il-'h&il ua1ng a U.t-eathing: waohi.ne £or- teat purpo,ieu, 
her;:ne.t1;clly ::seal the taecp1ccc of the tegt iuaak against the taoe or the l;>r-eath1ng maoh1ne . 
Inco1•porate 
⬇ ⬈eeh:m!e.-: to proy!.d⬉ the tttie::.l ⬊!t lcakus;c c::;t⬋bl!ahed in rar.agraph 4.1,7.1.3, 
Th• b!"'9Af:hincr 1ru1Ah1nA 11h11111 h111v,.. - a1ffll11■+.•rf +.,..enh•o1 rl⬌•A •p•".e. ,..f> •pp...,.. 
.. 
c 
.... ⬍.17 15n cc :r.d. :;h::.ll 
ensure B thol'ough mi.x:in_g of the gsses in the eimulated lu..
"
...e:• Th⬎ ⩄!pirator1 rate and tidsl volume 
shall be au.rriciently adjustable to meet ⬏h@ 1"f!q_u1,r-,⬐nt8 of thi⬑ ⬑⬒⬓!f!⬔!.t-ion. The ⬕imu..le.t!!d 
Nspiratory flow ahall essentially tollow a .einuaodial p11.tteMl auoh a.8 oocu
.r8 in t,ums.n NBpiration= 
4,1,7,2.1 
Performance Testing: 
For each mask teated, determine the added OXY«en flow rates required to meet the 
percentage total ox,gen vs, altitude CUI'Ve {Curve B) Figure ⬖. 
Testa shall be conduoted at a m1n1mum or 
tnree 111rrerent altitudes between 10,000 feet and 18,500 ree11 when the breathing machine minute volume 11. 
15 lpm B'l'P.S anCI ⬗ne tlelal volume 18 700 co BTPS, and at 18,500 reet and the maxi.mum altitude for 11hich 
approval :I.a aesirea plus a min1muru or tnree a<1a1t1onal approximately equally spaced intermediate altitudes 
""'"' the breathing machine minute volume 18 30 lpm .B'I'f'S and tne tlelal volume le 1100 oo BTPS. 
NOTE1 For the&e t•sts the p⬘rcentage total oxygen may be. esd.mated by mea1uring the percentage of o2 in the 
simulated end tidal geses 
I or alternatively i>y subtr•cting the. percent•ge of N2 in the simulated ex• 
pired end tidal 1ues fro. unity, All anples ollali be taken dur11\g 1t1b1l1HQ con41t1ons , 
P⬙r.to?'!!!.Snce J
.nal7sia: 
Uc!r.g the rea⬚ta obtained 1n raragraph 4.1.7 .2.1., aatabl1all a maak pe1\to.t'marice ow-ve 
!.!! i!!di"'!.t⪢o:! fo?' C,.1..

-,e 0 ot P.1.g'
.!.

"9
 2. 

!..

"l e:t:bl!=.':1.r
.g thi:: eu....

-;c, a :a.zi&w:.. v: 5 pei' \ient ot the ViilUes obttt1ned me.y tall above the cu..

⬛, provided theee valuee eppecr to be r=ndoml;; d1atr1buted with r--eapeot to th@ ta Rt Q.Orv.:Ut1.on8 ⬜ 

4.1,7,2,3 
Eatablieh Ground Level Pertormanoi,t ⬝lfU\i: t.hf) .... Ak fT'nll'I t.hn•• +:-•+--n n.-n 'PaTtaa71■nh h ., -7 _.,,., Mhn•• 
perfol'!ll8nce moat nearly ooinoidea with the mask pertol'IUnoe o\ll'Ve eBtftbU⬞hed per P8ragraph 4 ,1, 
7 ,2 ,2 et 
the maximum altitude for wh1oh aDDroVal 1B deB1red. Teat thiB maak on e breathin⬟ n.ooh1ne hov1 
F⬭i'torma.i°lce Tctto "B" (H"'"'•n SUbj⫂et!! At Altitude) - The validity or pertort11ance tente or l'aragraph 'f .1.7 
eball bi demonstrated by teatins ten rrmi1ka on at least ten d1tterent random.17 ae1eotet1 novice human o⬮Jcet;, e::eept that ⭣!'-1:" "ell indot;?tJ'linated aubJeota may be e:xpoeed to alt1tuctea greater than 40,000 ieet . 

Each cubJect shall be tested at 1.noremente or not more then 7500 teet altitude between 10,000 feet and the 
==:ti!:!'-"!! altitude for whioh approval 1e deeired with the meek held 1n place by the auepeneion doviQ• , SubJoot 
1eleot1on and b,-te:t'ing ahall be made 1n accordance with IJ.1.7.i. No teat re1ulta may i,.,; d.i.io■i-
-ded withot1t. 

adeqUJ!te t'<!Hon and tull written exPlanation, For these teete the aubJeoi> ehell wear tile uak in an altitude 
::d 	 :l:ic⬯⬰⬱⬲⬳o⬴!i"ta t
⬵e!t⬶⬷=⬸a⬹i ⬺·a:
8
d!⬻⬼⬽i t⬾⬿
e**;a⭀=⭁:⭂h** t⮕i".f.2:⮖:
t i⭃
d
1;
h
;_⭄;.;rthot at some altitude no more than 5,000 teet below the maximwn altltu.de ror whieh app:;-::>:ve.l !e d!:!!:!.⭅d 9t l.e@u1t three eubJeota Nach a breathing rate ot approau.matel;y 30 lpm :sTFS . To coh1eve this rat", 1-
"duoed hyperventilation 11187 be performed and 11et11u⭆1•hed Wider- oloac ⭇d!eal ⭈u.;,erv!sion ⭉ DUr1ng the t:eatµlg it thu 11WJjc:\it'• ai⭊te.-igl blvcd c⭋oen :!lt⭌⭍t!o?? !"!!11!1 below the base line eatabliahed 
(Hetnod ot 4,l ,8,:2) or the traohoal o:Q"gen p4rt1:1 preeeu..

..., talle below th•t required by applioable Civil Ail' Regulatioms (nethoa ot: ⭎.l.8,l) ., the c⭏se⭐ tlc⭑ to th" ⭒⮇8k ftlulll be inareaeed autr1c1ently to bring the blood o;,cygen .aturation or the tr11oheal oxygen p⭓rtial prenure to tho NgUirtd values, Thie oxygen flow vall.W Wall i""C'jil■ae the p⭔•
.,
•!cu: value eet9b11⭕hl!d for thi11 altitude 1n 4,1.7 .2,2, PN-oxygenat1on or the aul:>Jeota pr-ior to aooending to alt1tudee above 25,000 teet 1• considered dea1rable ea a earet;y preuaut1un. Eithar- *c:* the two t⭖ll¢⭗ing ⭘thod11 qy be used to reatt1m that the -.ak tf1ll deliver to the human the aama perccnt:ge ot 0X1gen !!!! detennln.ed on a breathiM machine. 

ll!>cre the val1d!t7 or the real.l.lta obtained under Paragraph 4 ,l,7 haa been previouel;y eetabliehail by eco,pa1'!eone with the reaulto obtained under thie paragraph, it, le permiuible to t⭙ot unl;y .ilve aul;Jeota, 

4.1.e.1 
!!•• .&
.nal781B Method (See alternate method, Paragraph 4,1,8,2) -- !'or theee teeta the pel'oentage total ox;,gcr. 
in the inspired g■aea reaching the lungs may be estimated by aaciing the percentage ot Va a;-.d the pcr;ent:oe 
<>t CCl:;! in the expiNd end tidal gaees, or alternatively b7 subtracting the pe1•oentage of lf
2 !n the expired 
end tidal gaaea from unity. All eamplea lhall be teken during atabill⭚eil uuniiltions. 

Values 110 estimated m.uat be ⭛quai to or in exoeea oi that 1how u .on tha Freentege totel o::cy-g⫇n Y⬑= altitude curve ot Figure 2, The m.1.nute volume or the aubJeot, as estimated trom :e:u,u...

-emente taken d.\tl'il'l
..g the teat: 
aa well aa the peroentage total o,cygen aohicveu shall ⫏ r--a;c;.-,ded :.t eeeh i!'?te!"V!1 ot ⪭lt1tude •t which a teat 11 11111c1e, Arterial Blood Oxygen Sat-Unit1on Method 
(See altcrr
.e.te ⭜thoct. Par!.graph 4 .1⭝8.l) - For this teat the eubJeot•a arteriaJ. blood oxj15,an Dat⭞⮈aticn ahs.ll be dcte:o=ined by U!2 or the ⭟ont.inuoua recording oximeter. A base line of bloOU oxygen aatura.tioD &
'loll be established for esoh eubjeot 1111 indicated below. Throughout t⭠e tt:Dt;1 a d1-op halon th!.⭡ b=.::e line =⭢
-=.ll n⭣t b⪢ !!11olif⭤d = Th$ minute volume or the aubject ae eet1mate4 rrce 
1DGasurementa tak⬆n dur!r
.g the te!t a e.e Mell as the blood oxygen aaturation values achie•ed, 8hell oe recorded at aaoh ia it¢rvnl cf ⫌ltitu⭥ et- !fh!oh !! teflt J..t1 mAde . 

" 
"l 
Q O , 
, ............. 
... 
Eet:lbl!.eh Blood (\:eyg'!n B⪭tur⫠tion •Base Line" :  When the method or Paragraph 4.1,8.2 11 used the blood oJcygen 
ea.tu.ration "b!!&e 11na" 11hall be established for each teat subJect prior to but aa near as praatival to the 
t!.!!!@ c,f oonduot1r,g the altitude teata. 
In ao f'ar ae posaible the teat aubJeot ahell be e>.
"P<>oed to the aar.;e 
condition• when the "baae linea ia being eat⭦blished aa t⭧oae to which he will. be c:xpQacd aw-1.ug: the elt!t⭨de 
⭩•k testing. Thie ehall include such things 88 his elttlng posture, degre" ot eot1v1t1, ir.st=cr.tat!cn =nd 
other dev1cee which might attect h1B bloocl oxygen saturation, 
AftU the oximeter to the ieated subject breathing ambient alt- 1n an altitude ⭪h=:'::er ⭫n::! ⫌=⭬en!! to 10.000 
teet. Level otr, and ror a period of three minutes or unt1l atab1l1zed rcad!r
.gG =re aohieYed, ⭭!tab11eh his 
omen blood _eaturat1on, 'l'ne result1mt recorth:d. pei⫐cent cat-u.raticn ::::h:ll be the ⭮ubJl!!!t• !!  10.000 r⭯et "baae 
line• Which atiall be oone1dered to oorreapond to lOC mm l'
.g ⭰ean tr:chsel o:.:ygen pe!"tial pre8&UN ⭱ Ascend to 
14,ooo reet and similarly establitih tile .su.bJect! a  l⭲,oco !'cct irba=e l!.n⭳11 et- thia 6lt1tud.• with the subJeot 
breatn1ng ambient air, Thl.& "baae line" al"-
.al1 be ccnc!dered tc correspond to 83 .8 imn }lg mean trachael Oxygen 
partial preBBur8 . 
Frtu,,eUw'ei Aaoo«d to 30,occ tcet ':tith th!? !'..!hJ!!at ⭴ee'!'ir,
.g en,A-13A. (or similar pressure demand type) usk and breathir ag l⭵ oxygen. Level ott and heve the tee.t subject put on the teat mask. The oxygen eupp:.,y to tho teat =:::k :.t this ⭶nd. su'be!Q'l⭤nt l"ve),ff- flh⭷ll be .11a determined iii Paragraph 11 .1.7.2.2. Ascend to tho =>:L
,.um altitude for whioh appJ'ovel 1e desired, le1rel off, remain at th1e altitude unt11 the oxygen et:tur⭸t!on he!! et:eb11.b:e.d. ; but. in no caae remain ror lesa than three tninutes at thl& altitude. 

Reoord the minute volume end the lowest values tor blood oxygen saturation obtaicea. The reading_ ehall ooi.- .iall b.olow th9 reQUiNd VAluee; eee 4 .1 ,8, Should this happen, immediately increase the oxygen flow to the i>Uiak per 
4.1.8 and make the required changes to ii.1.7.2 .2. and repeat all teats from Paragraph 4.1.;,2.2 through Pat1agraph 4.1.B.2.2. Descend at- 7,500 feet intervals recording the blood oxygen aaturat1or, and the minute volume ea above at each interval. 

4 ,1,9 
ouaran_
teed Mlnilnum Perrormance - Tne performance curve data ⭹Dtat-lia...
'"
,o.: in Par::gre.ph 1! .l .?.2.2 =!!d ¥⫹!'!.f'!ed 
in Paragraph 4.1.t,.l or 4.J..o,2 shall be incl\1.Uea 1n tho- test r-eport wh!eh 1:s eub?!!itted tor epproval by the 
mask manuracturer. Upon approval or- iih1: .1-efnn•t thia per-ro⭺nce .d;:t=. :.h⭻ll b2 1.h!!⭼?'PO!'⫟t-ed ,8e ⭽ part ot the 
relevane HAS Standaird Dra"ing. 
L
""ld1.v1dual ma.ek aaacmblice- end their perform!!.n{',e will be identi.tied by 
appropriate coding ul tiie i-
-cleva»t t:.AS ⭾tam!ard p;:rt ⭿⮀b-=r. 
'f♦.&. ■J.U 
,. - - ... 

Cold T⮁DtD (Gr-uund Le⮂·-.:l Prccc 
.. 

-c) ... Ens!.!-
""e th!! ⮃!!k temN!!r&t
-W"e has stabilized to approximately 2l 9C (70"F) , than on expoair.g the :r
..e.:k to sn ambient temper!ltu..ra of -1'0 °c (-40 °F) test immediately on a human eubJect ror s three :r,!.n!.!te period. Th!! !!!..!.ek !!h⮄ll fun.otton in s satiefactorY Dl!l.nner under these oonditione, with a nominsl euppl:, or 3 1pm NTPD or o⮅gen flowing to the maak. 

Enrlure,nne TP.-,,t. - The maak shall be subjected to a mini.mun, or 50.,000 s1JrlUJ.ated breathing O70leB 11.i; ■i'a ■ppro:⮆dwate l'⮇te or 30 oyoles per minute . Oxygen delivery during the 1nap1rat1on 11811' o;yole ahall follow 11 ""'ooth oUM"e eeaent1ally sinusoidal,. 1n which flow 1a at least- 70 lplD ror 1oc}i oi• the time., and ovav 30 lpw tui⮈ 50% o!' the remaining time , The mask muat operate aatiafaotorny throughout thie teat, At tl>e end or thio teat tho m:aak ■hall be teated 1n aco⮉rdanoe Mith Paragraph 4 .1:7 .2.1, and meet the m1n1mi.iiii ycr-:ui•mimv⮊ eu..

-.-⮋ ⮌=t9.bli!h⮍d tor the mask per Paragraph II ,1, 
7 ,2 ,2. 

4,1,12 

Teet Qn1aa1ona - Although apeQ1i'io teats are not- celled. tor to oc;;ver- eve2:7 rcq"
.lir-e⮎ent ot th.1!! e⮏e1t1o@tion⮐ 
th18 aoee not Nlease the m.anu.i■ct\11'1:r frl.liii thw 1-aopvuaib!lit7 :;f !-
..:....
-niehir
.g e. ⮑ek vh!.⮒h v-1 11 Dlil!!et these 
requirements, 

## Oxygen Mask Assembly, Passenger

Pdn!cd c⮔d d::!:ib!..!!'!d hy '. N!!tii,nl'.t! Stnndards Association. Inc. 

1315 Frmrteenth StrnRI, N. W. 

Wnal-.;nr,11"111 _i;,_ 0. r,_ 

# National Aerospace Standard

610 SHOREHAM BUii..OiNG. WASHiNGTON 5, O. "-• 

. 
)'.NSPECTION BY OSER - Uoon COlllPlet1on ot manufacturer conducted QU&l1t'1cat1011 teats, the ma•ke which have 
).. be⮗n toted ehall be delivered with the QUalitication teat report !or inspection, Coat or qual1ticat1on 
· · teat• eball be borne by the manutacturer, 

MANUFACTURER'S PRODUCTION Tf;STS -
q ,3 
4,3,l 
....... P11'\V R•tai -⮘-_,."',. - ⮙⭕1 th⮜ ⮚!"!⮛h⮜r: o!" th⮜ r⭕o⮇,tet,i, or the 1118.llk to An l!lp!)l"Opr1Ate rtxture Which 18 
oepable or produoing 8 miotlon within the m.u1k: and 111⮝asuring this auction and auction rlow rate ; Pl.u.g the 
o;,:ygen aupply tube , Ad,!uat the •uction t'low rate to 30 1pm, 
!!'he euotion inside the tacepiece ehall not 
exceed O./;O inch or water. The •uction shell not e:xceed 1.2 inches or water when the euction tlow ,:ate 1e 
increa_..d to 70 1pm. 
V
alues up to 0,80 and 2,0 inchea ot Nater may be used in place or o,6<> and 1,2 inches ot water 
reepect1vely where test data ror an 1ndlv1dual mask 1l'ldicatea th@ae value11 to be aatia.i'actor.r rrw 
the user• a atandpo1n⮞. 
4,3,3 

t>e,..f'n"""-Anne flte1d⮟" - Te«t.. AAnh mAAk 11t. aN1t1nd }.Aval 11lti.t;Ud_e 11t A bN&thirut: minute volume or 15 ll)ID BTPS 
Ar,;( 
; -tiiGt voi1m1e or 'ioo-;;,;·-BTPS And i,iii,
- the -two oxv.:en flow rates eetabl1ahed per Paragraph 4·,1,7 
.2,3, 
The oercenta⮠e 
-totai-ox,,⮡en· 
value11· ao obtai?led ahali eaual or e:xceed the reepect1ve values uoed in 
Parei:raph 4.i,9, 
-
N<m:1 
Th1e teat shall be mandatory until auch tillle ae a reliable quality _level le •⮢tai>lieheii, ⮣ ⮤⮥i•⮦le 
_ 
quality level shall have been establ1ahe<l lif'hen ten consecut1ve proauc"C1on maeKa nove poeDeu t.n4e o"Ii" 
with no failures, following which, five consecutive production lots ehall have paoaea teat ii1thout 
arcy- rejections. For thls purpone each lot 15h.zs.ll not. c;x:cced lW 1n n.Uw.ter an" te11 DCliiipl⮧ iil,g;Dka :-;:vw. 
Vil.Ch loi. ah.all be tented Ail nUove. 
Other Te•ts - It shell be the mnuro⮨turer• 
- runonsibilitv to 1'onnUlate and pursue a QUB11ty control program that wili reaUlt in a high and atable oualitY level, The foregoing teeh which hove been atipulated ahould in no way be conatrued ae eatabl1ah1ng ·11
m1t11 beyond which the m.enuracturer need not go in assuring oOlllpli­
ance with all deeign requiremente or the specified article. It lo expected thet the mas!< manutacturer Nill search for, and correct, those def1cienc1es which woUld decrease the usability and proper general function or ttle mask WlO.er the actual. al.t1tut1e cond1t1ona wnicn mignt be expected in aervice. 

Approvai - A production teat procedure document ah.all be aubmi.tted tor approval tu the pr-ou\ii'ir
.g a'1t1v1t;;. 

OF.traRI\L INSTRUGTim:s - ⮩eN ⮪ize or (')th⮫!- ⮬l'n81der⫞t1on T"f!!,ru}.t in mol!'t! than one unit being packaged within a shipping carton, the individual units shall be individually packaged within the shipping carton, Thia reouirement 1s 111andatorv in order to orovide suitable orotect1on and 1dent1ticat1on during storage and handling after removal of the individual units from the major shipping carton, Whenever practicable, each unit shall be packaged with the supply hose wound within the racepiece . The hose shall be eo wound that when pulled out or the facepiece 1t will not cause the gas bag to twist or otherwise restrict tne uow of oxygen 1nto tile racep1ece, It is suggested that one-haH or the hose be wound cloclcllise and the other half counterclockwise . ⮭nwr&T 
.. 

⮮.'A⮯ .,. T"A1u4Ane1 nnn 
.. 

D .. ...  
D 
....

.. 'hfr.11 
'hD 
.... 

Ann .... m 
... 

⮰AA Da .," .. 

,,,...., -ff'!(\11Jlt1 nf' th⮱ m!.s:k fol' in111pectlon 
1'\U,.,..l"UUlolll u4+.hnu+. rlAfflA01t"ID' f'.kA ,.. 

... 

r\+.t114nA 
.. "" 1 nhP1 n .  
PACKAGDIG - Materials al\d methods used i n  n•ckadrur the article ahall be nuitable to enaure protection of 

the article tr01n damage or deter,ioration. a 
-
-
5,6 
MARKING - All containers including individual packages and outer cartona shell be marked with the roll.owing 
1nformat1on: 
a. M1un.1fl1cturer111 iiame 
d 
⮲ M8nUfaeturer1 s Part Ht_
imber (includiJl
__g dA1'h number when UJ⮳ed) 
e ,  Manuractlll'ing Date 
r. ⮴ntity in Container 
g. i
'SO Nt.mfoer ( optionalj 
NAS i i79 
SHEET !O 
Copyright_ 1961; ,A_erospa.ce lnduslries Association ol America ! lne . 

INSTRUCTION 'l'AO - Where the nroellJ'irui: activity is aware that the manutaoturer1 a article will reQU1re apecial attention duriiu: receiv1JU:-:lnapect10ii or installation or operation, the pl'OClll'ing activitJ 11111 make apeoial reQUeat to the iiianutacturer to- provide a re111ovable 1natl'llct1on tag att1.Xed to each article . 

5,8 
SPBOIAL BAHDL!HG PROCEDURE - Where the manuracturer 1a awaN that certain nonoi>v1oua characteriatica ot h1a 
nrl!1on or the apec1t1ed article will t'equu,e ai;,ecial. banelll.ng 
J>rooedƢa, it l!D&ll. be ƣƤ! rnponaii>ilƥtf 
or the manuracturer to notiry tne proourUIS aot:i.vu1 to tnat erreci; ana tnerearter w ur:i.x an appropr:i.aw 
removal 1natruct1on tag to eaob production article delinred, 

## Oxyge:N Mask Assembl Y ,  Passenger

PJinte-d .ond dislrihuled by: NaUonal Standotds AssociaHon. Inc. 

1315 Fourt•enth StrHI. N. W. 

Washington 5. D. C. 

AEROSPACE INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA, INC., 
610 SHOREHAM BUILDING, WASHINGTON :I, 0, c, 
-· 
·····-
--
Printed and distributed bv: Nahonal Standards Assoc,aliob. lne. 

-
1315 Fowleenlh Slreet, N. W. 

WOBhinglon 5. D. C. 

Copyright, 1961, Aerospace Industries Association of America, Inc. 

CURVE C 
BE DETERMINED 
FOR EACH MASK 
APPROVAL 

Altl'ITUIE 
I' TOTAL <>,! 
iEET 
ALTITUDE 
FEET 
18,500 
25,78 
26,40 
19,000 
.. ,., """"' 
21.02 
.. 
\,l , VVV 
.. 
rvv, 
21 ,91! 
.... 
,v.,,,.., 
27,70 
20,000 
12,000 
22,91 
29,08 
21,000 
13,000 
23,94 
22,000 
14,000 
25,02 
30,55 
25,000 
15,000 
·26,17 
33,81 
24,000 
16,000 
27.:;9 
35,60 
25,000 
17,000 
28,66 
37,52 
26,000 
16,000 
30.05 
27,000 
39,59 
18,500 
30.77 
41,81 
28,000 
44,20 
29,000 
30,000 
46,76 
31,000 
49,57 
32,000 
55.87 59,.43 
33,000 
34,ooc 
{e ,.,,.,,., """''vvv 
63,33 
67.59 
72,25 
37,000 
77,33 
38,000 
62,66 
39,000 
88,98 
40,000 

## Procurement L:>T'L:.L;.;Lt• Icp. I Iun Oxygen **Mask** Assembly, Passenger

NAS i i79 
SHEET 14 
Copyright, 1961, Aerospac@ Industries Association o! America, Inc. 

Printed and dialrlbu.ted by: Nallonat Stanaar<is A,55oc1aiion, inc. 

1:JlS Founeenth S1reet. N. W. 

W°'h1ng1on .), D. C, 

## Oxygen Mask Assembly, Passenger _.

Copyright, i961, Aerospace Indt.istries Associiit.ion oi AmericH, Inc . 

Prinled and diotJibuled by: Nallonal Slanda,d.s AnoclaUon, Inc. 

1315 Fourteenlh Slreel, N. W. 

Waablngton 5, D. C. 