
## Sp'Exjificat!On - Aircraft Skis

This specification defines the 
min:imum requirements for air­
craf't skis suitable for use on 
civil aircraf't. 

## Applicable Sp'Exjifications

1.1 The applicable sections of the latest issue and amemment of ANC-5 
Strength of Metal Aircraf't Elements am ANC-18 Design of Wood Air­
craf't Structures - are made a part of this specification as herein­
art 
er noted. 
2.1 This specification provides design criteria for skis tor use on 
civil aircraf't. 

## 3. Ma.Tmlial And Workmanship

All materials used in the ski assembly shall be of a quality which ex­
perience or tests have demonstrated to be suitable am dependable for use in aircraf't skis am shall conform to specifications which will insure their having the strength and other properties assumed in the design. All workmanship shall be consistent vith high-grade aircraf't ski manufacturing practice. 

3.1 Fabrication Methods: The methods of fabrication employed in 
the construction of the ski assembly shall be such as to pro­
duce consistently sound structures. When a fabrication process 
requires close control to attain this objective, the process 
shall ·be performed in a manner for which suitability am depend­
ability have been established on the basis of experience or tests. 
3.2 stamard Fastenings: All bolts, pins, screws, and rivets used in 
the ski assembly shall be of a type the suitability and depend­
ability of which have been demonstrated by experience or tests. 
The use of a suitable and dependable locking device or method is 
required for all such bolts, pins, screws. Self-locking nuts 
shall not be used on bolts subject to rotation. 
J.3 Castings: All castings shall be of high quality, clean, soum, 
and f'ree from blow holes, porosity, or surface defects. 
3.4 Protection: All members of the ski assembly shall be suitably 
protected against deterioration or loss of strength in service 
due to weathering, corrosion, abrasion, or other causes. 

## Sp'Exjification - Aircraft Skis

                           ysE OF j:)R 
                                       _RE¹IA.,NCE UºON :rH.tS DQCUMENT 
                                                                           »R ANY.. NATIONAL AERQSPAC.1' STANDARD IS ENTIRELY VOLUNTARY. AIA DOES NOT QUALIFY SUPPLIERS OR 
COPYRIGHT Aerospag.§lT,l.in.d_µ_5,t;
                                          s
                                          i;:,i;¼½"'1¾¿À(;)G;J.!'9,(;Á.1[0.J;1.>c:Ât;Elln!Ã.ÄÅqaJATltl;l;ÆÇ A((iJ:,hÈÉÊ-%JiANDARDS AIA MAKES NO REPRESENTATION OR CLAIM RESPECTING (1) 
Licensed by InfomËftlJililin\E'Harrd;rfllJ.i§''.1/slwv<Ilci:e\sb.RTICULAR APPLICATION, OR (2) THE EXISTENCE OF OR
                                                                                                                           0 
                                                                                                                            APPLICABILITY THERETO OF PATENT OR TRADEMARK RIGHTS. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     () 

3.5 Inspection Provisions: Adequate means shallÞbe provided to permit 
the close examination of such parts of the ski assembly as require 
periodic inspection, adjustments for-proper alignment and function­
ing, and lubrication of moving parts. 
3.6 Identification: F.ach·aircrai't ski shall be suitably placarded with 
the following information: 

Manufacturer's Name 
Ski Model 
Maximum Limit Load in Powxls 
Serial No. and Date of Manufacture 
NAS Spec 
•. No. 
"For Installation Geometry, see 
Ski Installation Drawing No. _ 
- 

These markings shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the ski and shall be of such character that they·will not be obliterated or effaced as a result of service usage. 

## 4. Detail Requirements 4.1 Design

4.l.1 . If safety cables are used, separate **means.** of attaching the 
cables shall be provided at the forward and af't ends of 
the ski. In designs on which a tension cord is used, the 
cord shall be attached to a point on the ski different 
from that to which the safety cable is attached. 

## 4.2 Strength

4.2.1 Material Strength Properties: The sßàength properties of 
the materials used shall be based on a ·suffiqient number 
of tests of material to establish design **values** on a statistical basis. The values contained in Aá5 and 
ANC-18 shall be used unless shown to be inapplicable ·1n 
a particular case. The design values shall be so chosen 
that the probability of any ski assembly being wxler­
strength because of material variations is extr-.ely 
remote. When.- consideration of the design for fatigue 
·conditions may be important, the ski assembly shall be 
designed, insofar as practicable, to avoid points of 
stress concentration. 
4.2.2 The strength of the ski, including the pedestal• shall be 
substantiated by a stress analysis or by static tests to 
ultimate load. 

o 1-----------------------------,-----
-=-r:-:,.,, 
                                                                             ... 
                                                                              :;::.,o:::: 
                                                                                .. 
                                                                                -.  ____ 
                                                                                          ..., 

TITLE 
                                             Specification 

D: 
CL 
< 
SPIDIFICATION - AâCRAF'l' SKIS 

# . . Aircraft Industries Association Of America, Inc .. E10 Shoreham Building, Washington !5, D. C.

4.2.2.1 Structural or stress analysis may be used for sub­
stantiation only when the structure conforms with 
types for which experience has shown such methods 
to be reliable. 
4.2.3 Loads: 
Strength requirements are specified in terms of 
limit and ultimat_e loads. Limit loads are .the maximum loads 
anticipated in service. Ultimate loads are equal to the 
limit loads multiplied by the factor of safety and in certain 
cases by an additional special factor as noted below. Unless 
otherwise noted, loads specified are limit loads. 
4.2.4 Factor of Safety: 
The factor of safety shall be 1.5. 
4.2.4.1 Special Factors: 
When the¾e may be uncertainty con­
cerning the actual strength of particular parts of 
the ski assembly or when the strength is likely ·to 
deteriorate in service prior to norool replacement, 
additional factors of safety shall be provided to insure that the strength and reliability of such 
parts are not less than the rest of the ski assembly. 
The following special factors shall be c·onsidered for 
both stress ·analysis and static tests, When several 
factors are involved, only the largest factor need be 
used. (See following note) 

| Note: ¿ial Factor Exanples:                     | The ultilllate load    |
|-------------------------------------------------|------------------------|
| for a casting equals the limit load times 1.5   |                        |
| times the apnropriate casting factor specified  |                        |
| in 4.2.4.l(a), (1) or (2).                      |                        |
| z                                               |                        |
| 0                                               |                        |
| iii                                             |                        |
| 0::                                             |                        |
|                                                 |                        |
| The ultimate load fo':' a casting when consider­ |                        |
| ing casting, bearing and/or fitting factors     |                        |
| equals the limit load times 1.5 times the       |                        |
| largest special factor involved. This special   |                        |
| factor will be 2.0 if section 4,2.4.l(a)(l) is  |                        |
| pertinent or 1.25 if section 4,2.4,l(a)         | (2) is                 |
| pertinent, unless the bearing factor is larger. |                        |
| Since the fitting factor of 1.15 is less than   |                        |
| either of                                       | ·                      |
| the above two casting factors, it               |                        |
| ceases tÀ be critical and may be ignored.       |                        |

## Casting Factors

(a) 
;Q 
I 
C\I 
.-l 
(1)- If visual inspection only is to be employed, the 
special factor shall be 2.0. 
TITLE 
LI.I 
 
Q 
-I 
< 
> 
0 
D: 
Q. Q. 
< 
SPECIFICATI0Á- AIRCRAFI' SKIS 

# Aircraft Industries Association Of America, Inc.. 610 Shoreham Building, Washington 15, 0, C.

(2) 
The special factor may be reduced to 1.25 for 

| u1                                               |
|--------------------------------------------------|
| least three sample castings are tested to shc,w  |
| compliance with these factors, ani if all sample |
| am production castings are determined to be ac­   |
| ceptable upon ccmpletion of a visual and radio­   |
| graphical inspection.                            |

(b) Bearing Factors 
The factor of safety in bearing at bolted or pinned joints shall be in accordance with those bearing factors specified in ANC-5. 

(c) Fitting Factor 
Fittings are defined as parts such as end term.ina:Ls used to join one structural member to another. 

A 
multiplying factor of safety of at least 1.15 shall be used in the analysis of all fittings the strength of which is not proved by limit and ultimate load tests in which the actual stress conditions are simu­
lated in the fitting and the surrounding structure. 

This factor shall be applied to all portions of the fitting, the means of attachment, and bearing on the members joined. 

The fitting factor need not be applied if a type of joint design based on compre­
hensive test data is used. 

4. 
2.5 Strength and Defonnation: 
The ski assembly shall be capable of 
supporting limit loads without suffering detrimental permanent 
deformations. 
At all loads up to the limit loads, the deforma­
tion shall be such.as not to interfere with safe operation of the aircraft on which the sld. is to be used. 
The ski assembly 
shall be capable of supporting ultimate loads without failure 
for at least three secon:is, unless proof or strength is demon­
strated by dynamic tests simulating actual conditions of load 
application. 

## Rating Qualifications

5.1 Ratings: 
The ski manufacturer. shall select the maximwn limit load 
for which the ski asser.ibly will be rated. 

## Specification - Aibcraft Skis

NAS 80_8 
THII DRAWING 9Ul'ER■EDH ALL ANTEC:Elll!NT ■TAHDARD DllAWING■ P-OR THII ■A 
.. 

E l'RODUC:T, AND ■HALL ■_ECOMll &P"l'ECTIVll 

                                ,011 VENDOR .. 
                                               ANUP"AClURCIIS NOT LATER THAN - M:)NTH■ APTER THIE LATE■T DATE OP" j'l'l'IIOYAL ■HOWH, 
COPYRIGHT Aerospace Industries Association of America, Inc. 
                                                                               (AIA/NAS) 
Licensed by Information Handling Services 

AIRCRAFT INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA, INC 
.. 610 SHOREHAM BUILDING, WASHINGTOl',I 5. D. C. 

(a) 
Each design of ski assembly shall be substanȮiatea as 
described herein to establish the following selected 
rating: 
$$\mathbf{L}=\mathbf{\Lambda}\mathbf{\Lambda}\mathbf{\Lambda}\mathbf{\Lambda}\mathbf{\Lambda}\mathbf{\Lambda}\mathbf{\Lambda}\mathbf{\Lambda}\mathbf{\Lambda}\mathbf{\Lambda}\mathbf{\Lambda}\mathbf{\Lambda}$$

Note: 
        In order for the ski t0 be eligible for installation on 
anȯ• Ȱiven model aircraft, the maxinrum limit load (L) shall be 
at least equal to S x fl where 11s11 is the maximum static load 
and/'/ is the limit land:ing load factor previously determined 
from static drop tests of the airplane by the aircraft manu­
facturer. 
             In lieu of a value of fl determ:ined from such drop 
tests, a value of 11 determ:ined from the follovt:ing formula may 
be used: 
             9000 
fl = 2.80 + -.-,--,.-= 
                       where W is the weight of the aircraft. 
           w + Looo 

5.2 Loading Requirements: The ratings for ski assemblies shall be sub­
stantiated for the following conditions: 
(a) 
Distributed Up Load 
(b) 
Concentrated Up Load 
(c) 
Distributed Side Load 
(d) 
Concentrated Side Load 
5.3 Test Requirements and Methods: 
The ski assembly shall be ȱestigated 
for limit and ultimate loads as set forth below. 
The pedestal type ski, including the pedestal, shall be designed to withstand the loads when supported at the pedestaj_ bearing· sleeve. 

In the case of the c_lamp-on ski: 

(a) 
The ski assembly shall be supported at those p) aces on the 
cradle which will trans::tl.t the test loads as they would be 
imposed dur:ing ground operation. 
(b) 
If a Tiheel and tire combination is used as a means of support, 
sinrJlat:ing an actual installation of the ski assembly, steps 
shall be taken to prevent the tire from being pushed off the 
wheel (e.g., water under pressure within the tire) during the 
application of the loads for the conditions specified in 
sections 5.2(c) and (d). 
(c) 
The condition specified in section 5.2 (b) need not be considered 
when, upon installation, the tire rests on the ski runner and the 

## Title Specification Specificatioh - Aircraft Skis

7 
N 
rl 
Ul 
 
a 
J 
c( 
> 
0 
0: 
Q. 
Q. 
c( 

  ,. 
. . 

# Aircraft Industries Association Of America, Inc,. 610 Shoreham Building, Washington !5, D, C,

test load would be transmitted directly from the ski to the tire. 

S.3.1 Distributed L1Jnit Up Load: 
An upward load equal to the rated 
load (L) shall be distributed uniformly along the ski bottom 
and symmetrically with respect to the pedestal bearing sleeve 
in the fore-and-aft direction. 
That portion of the front of 
the ski which is at a greater distance from the bearing sleeve 
than the aft end need not carry aey of the load. 
5.3.2 Concentrated Limit Up Load: 
A concentrated up load equal to the 
load specified in 5.3.1 shall be applied to the ski bottom 
directly under the pedestal bearing sleeve. 
,5.3.3 Distributed Limit Side Load: 
A sideward load equal to 35% of 
the load specified in S.3.1 shall be distributed uniformly along 
the outside edge of the ski bottom arrl symmetrically with respect to the pedestal. bearing sleeve in the fore-and-aft direction. 
That portion of the front of the ski which is at a greater 
distance from the bearing sleeve than the aft end need not car:cy 
any of the load. 
Note: 
Roouction for Pedestal Height: 
When the height of the aircraft axle .from the ground.with the ski installed is greater than the moment arm R given by the fonnula 

$$\mathrm{\boldmath~R~}=\mathrm{\boldmath~9~}+\mathrm{\boldmath~\frac{S}{\frac{1000}{S}},}$$
where S is defined in 5.1, the side load may be reduced to the value which is obtained by multiplying the Side load specified in 5.3 
.J by a factor equal to the ratio of the moment arm to the height of the axle from the ground. 

5.3.4 Concentrated Limit Side Load: 
A horizontal load equal to 
.1341· shal..l be applied to the edge of the ski bottom at a 
distance forward of the axle equal to three tines the height 
of the skiplane axle frOJ!l the ground, exce,t that, if this 
pedestal hei- gh
t is less than the moment arm given by the 
formula in S.J .3. then the distance shall be three times the 
moment arm given by the above formula. 
5.4 
Ȳ 
Cut-Away Skis i 
ln the case of a ski where the center section of the 
aft end of the runner is cut away, the applicable load for that 
section of the ski shaJ.l be divided between the two parts of the 
runner in proportion to the relative widths of these parts. 
LLI 
ȳ 
C 
cu11i,1c•"o" 
TITLE 
Specification 
SPECIFICATION - AffiCRAFT SKIS 
0:: 
ll. ll. 
t( 
