
## Specification - Aircraft Seats And Bef˓Ths

This specification defines the mini­
mum performance and safety standards 
for seats and berths to be installed 
in certificated aircra..rt. 

## Applicable Specifications Q) Cancelled After 9 Oc'Idber 1991 No Superseding Standard L,

l,l The latest issue and amendment of the following documents a.re ma.de a 
part of this specification by reference to the applicable sections 
hereinafter noted. 
l.l.l CAA Safety; Regulation Release No, 259. "Compliance of Equip­
ment aoo Materials Used in Air Carrier Aircraft with Fire Prevention Requirementsn. 

## Types 2.

2.1 This specification covers all types of crew and passenger seats and 
berths for civil aircraft use in the following categories: 

## 3. Ma.Te..'Iua.L And Workmanship

3,1 Materials shall be of a quality 'Which experience aniJ./or tests have 
conclusively demonstrated to be suitable for use in aircraft seats 
and berths. Worlona.nship shall be consistent with high-grade air­
craft manufacturing practice. 
3,l.l Protection: All members of the structure shall be suitably 
protected against deterioration or loss of strength in ser­
vice due to weathering, corrosion, abrasion or other causes 
where the type of material requires such protection, 
3.1.2 Fire Precaution: The covering and upholstery and all other 
exposed material used in the seat or berth shall have name­
resistant properties as specified by CAA Safety Regulation 
Release No. 259. If ashtrays are installed in, or attached 
to, the seat or berth, they shall be of a self-contained, 
completely removable type. 

DEI'AIL REQUIREMENTS 
INACTIVE FOR NEW DESIGN 

CUSTODIAN NATIONAL AEROSPACE STANDARDS COMMITTEE 

## Specification - Aircraft Seats Alld Berths

USE OF OR RELIANCE UPON THIS DOCUMENT OR ANY NATIONAL AEROSPACE STANDARD IS ENTIRELY VOLUNTARY. AIA DOES NOT QUALIFY SUPPLIERS OR 
CERTIFY CONFORMANCE OF ITEMS PRODUCED UNDER NATIONAL AEROSPACE STANDARDS. AIA MAKES NO REPRESENTATION OR CLAIM RESPECTING (1) 

# (D Cancelled After 9 October 1991 No Superseding Standard

4.1.1 Generals The seat shall be designed so that in anr or its 
adjustable positions **and** when installed facing in a specified 
direction or directions, it will pro7ide protection tor the 
occupant in a manner compatible with the .function tor which 
the seat is designed, i.e., pilot, cabin attendant, check 
pilot, passenger, and the like. 
4.1.2 ̺trength: All seats o.nd be1·ths intenaed for single occupancy 
shall be designed for the ultimate loads specified in Table 
I to which occupants are subjected. The loads shall be con­
sidered as acting separately and shall be based on a passen­
ger weight of 170 pounds for Type I and 190 pounds (includes 
parachute) tor Types II and III. The sideward, upward and 
downward loads, as specified in Table I, are the minimums 
corresponding to fiight and groum load conditions prescrib­
ed in the applicable Civil Air Regulations. The forward 
loads correspond to the emergency conditions **prescribed** in 
the applicable Civil Air Regulations. For seats intended 
tor multiple occupancy the loads must be increased accord­
ingly. Ultimate loads are 1.5 times the limit loads 
- 

Type I 
Type II* 
Type III 
Force 
Dire:ction 
1710 lbs. (9.0 g) 
285 lbs. (1.5 g) 
855 lbs. (4.5 g) 
1710 lbs. (9.0 g) 
Forwe.rd 
Sideward 
Upward 
Downward 
1710 lbs. (9.0 g) 
285 lbs. (1.5 g) 
570 lbs. (3.0 g) 
1254 lbs. (6.6 g) 
1020 lbs. (6.o g) 
255 lbs. (1.5 g) 
340 lbs. (2.0g) 
765 lbs. (4.5 g) 

*Civil Air Regulations require use of parachute 1n utility­
category aircraft operated 1n acrobatic fiight **when** carry­
ing passengers. 

4.1.2.l Ult.1mrrt.e Load Strength: The seat or berth 1n arq 
of its adjustable positions while installed..tacina 
in a specified direction or directions, when occu­
pied by ma.xi.mum number of occupants, shall be cap­
able of withstanding ultimate loads without failure 
for at lee.st three (3) seconds. 
4.1.2.2 J,1rn1t Load Strengths The seat or berth 1n ar:,y ot 
its adjustable positions shall be capable ot withstanding the limit loads without suffering detrimental permanent deformation. At all. loads up to 
# (D Cancelled After 9 Oc'Idber 1991 No Superseding Standard

these limit loads the deformation shall be such as 
not to interfere њTith safe operation of the air­
plane. 
         {Note: 
                 this limit load requirement is not 
applicable to the forward loading since it is an 
emergency condition). 

4.1.3 Safetv Belt Ancho_rages: vihen anchorages for safety 
belts are provided thqy shall be of a type which 
will pero1it self-nli&,rning of the belt and fitting. 
4.1.4 Should.!'r Harness Anchorages: When anchorages for 
shoulder harnesses are provided, they shall be so 
located ns to ensure they will be ahove the shoul­
der level of the occupant. 
4.1.5 Projectionћ: The surfaces of the seat shall be 
free from sharp e<lges or ќny projections which may 
chafe the safety belt or harness webbing. Projec­
tions, sharp corners, and other hazardous features, 
against which occupants :n..'1y be tr..rmm during a 
crash, shall be avoided insofar as possible. Any 
unavoidable features of this nature shall be ade­
quately padded. 
4.2 Mc'lr'king: 
Each seat or berth shall be legibly and permanently marked with the following information: 
Manufacturer's Name Model Number or Model Name 
Seat Type 
Serial Number or Date of Manufacture 
National Aircraft Standard Humber (NAS_) 
4 - 
.3 Qu.a.lifioa.tion Tests: 
Tests :;:hall be conducted as necessary 
to demonstrate the following: 
(a) that seats or berths 
manufactured in accordance with this specification are cap­
able of supporting the limit loads without detrimental 
permanent deformation; (b) that, at all loads up to limit 
loads, the deformation shall be such as not to interfere 
with the safe operation of the aircraft; and (c) that the 
structure is capable of supporting the ultimate loads speci­
fied herein without failure for at least 3 seconds. 
4.3.1 Detail Qualification Test Reauirements: 
The seat 
or berth shall be loaded in tests such that the 
loads imposed on the sea.t or berth by the occupant(s) 
in conjunction with the safety belt or belts and 
their attachments are accurately simulated by means 
of a block or frame or duruny, said block or frame or 
CERTIFY CONFORMANCE OF ITEMS PRODUCED UNDER NATIONAL AEROSPACE STANDARDS. AIA MAKES NO REPRESENTATION OR CLAIM RESPECTING (11 

## (D Cancelled After 9 Oc'Iober 1991 No Superseding Standard

dU111D1 being restrained in the seat or berth bf the 
belt or belts attached to their fittings. The 
teats may be conducted in a jig simulating installa­
tion conditions. 

4.3.1.l When a seat or berth is to be installed or 
adjuats to face in other than the forward 
direction, su:f"tioient tests shall be made 
to substantiate the seat strength tor "11 
intended positions. 
4.3.1.-2 When testing for a particular load condi­
tion ot a vertically or horizontally ad­
justable seat, the most critical seat posi­
tion associated with that load shall be 
used tor the test• 
4.3.,l •. 
3 Where the safety belt or belts or harnesa 
are not attached to the seat oi: berth 
structure, the seat or berth shall be 
tested tor the loads which would be im­
posed on such installation. 
4.3.2 Flame-Resistance Test or Seat Coverst Specimens of 
the seat covering and upholstery- shall meet the tests outlined in CAA Safety Regulation Release Mo. 259. 
CERTIFY CONFORMANCE OF ITEMS PRODUCED UNDER NATIONAL AEROSPACE STANDARDS. AIA MAKES NO REPRESENTATION OR CLAIM RESPECTING 11) 