# Designation: D471 −16A (Reapproved 2021) Standard Test Method For Rubber Property—Effect Of Liquids1

This standard is issued under the fixed designation D471; the number immediately following the designation indicates the year of original adoption or, in the case of revision, the year of last revision. A number in parentheses indicates the year of last reapproval. A
superscript epsilon (´) indicates an editorial change since the last revision or reapproval.

This standard has been approved for use by agencies of the U.S. Department of Defense.

## 1. Scope

  1.1 This test method covers the required procedures to
evaluate the comparative ability of rubber and rubber-like
compositions to withstand the effect of liquids. It is designed
for testing: (1) specimens of vulcanized rubber cut from
standard sheets (see Practice D3182), (2) specimens cut from
fabric coated with vulcanized rubber (see Test Methods D751),
or (3) finished articles of commerce (see Practice D3183). This
test method is not applicable to the testing of cellular rubbers,
porous compositions, and compressed sheet packing, except as
described in 12.2.2.

  1.2 Periodically, it is necessary to produce a new lot of an
IRM oil to replace the dwindling supply of the current product.
The Chairman of the subcommittee shall have the authority to
approve the production of a replacement lot. Once produced,
the technical data of the new lot shall be presented, in a
comparative fashion, to that of the existing lot and balloted
upon by the membership of the D11.15 subcommittee and,
either subsequently or concurrently, balloted upon by the
membership of the D11 main committee for approval to release
the new lot for distribution.

  1.3 In the event that an IRM oil becomes unavailable for
distribution due to depletion, the Chairman of the subcommit-
tee shall have the authority to approve production of a new lot
and, after a meeting of the task group, regularly scheduled, or
not, to release a quantity of the product for distribution
sufficient enough only to address a backlog. Once the backlog
is addressed, the process described in 1.2 shall be followed.

  1.4 ASTM Oils No. 2 and No. 3, formerly used in this test
method as standard test liquids, are no longer commercially
available and in 1993 were replaced with IRM 902 and IRM
903, respectively (see Appendix X1 for details).

  1.5 ASTM No. 1 Oil, previously used in this test method as
a standard test liquid, is no longer commercially available and

in 2005 was replaced with IRM 901; refer to Table 1 and Appendix X3 for details.

1.6 ASTM No. 5 Oil was accepted into Specification D5900

as an industry reference material in 2010 and designated as
IRM 905. The composition, and properties of this immersion
oil were not changed and the data in Table 1 remains current.
Refer to Appendix X4 for other details.

  1.7 The specifications and properties listed in Table 1 for
IRM 901, IRM 902, IRM 903, and IRM 905 are also
maintained in Specification D5900.
  1.7.1 The subcommittee responsible for maintaining Test
Method D471, presently D11.15, shall review the data in
Specification D5900 to ensure that it is identical to that which
appears in Test Method D471. This shall be accomplished at
the time of the 5 year review or more frequently when
necessary.

  1.8 Historical, technical, and background information re-
garding the conversion from ASTM No. 1, ASTM No. 2, and
ASTM No. 3 Oils to IRM 901, IRM 902, and IRM 903
immersion oils is maintained in Practice D5964.
  1.8.1 The subcommittee responsible for maintaining Test
Method D471, presently D11.15, shall review the data in
Practice D5964 to ensure that it is identical to that which
appears in Test Method D471. This shall be accomplished at
the time of the 5 year review or more frequently when
necessary.

1.9 This test method includes the following:

| Change in Mass (after immersion)                    | Section   |    11 |
|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------|-------|
| Change in Volume (after immersion)                  | Section   |    12 |
| Dimensional-Change Method for Water-Insoluble Liq-  |           |       |
| uids and Mixed Liquids                              | Section   |    13 |
| Change in Mass with Liquid on One Surface Only      | Section   |    14 |
| Determining Mass of Soluble Matter Extracted by the |           |       |
| Liquid                                              |           |       |
| Section                                             | 15        |       |
| Change in Tensile Strength, Elongation and Hardness |           |       |
| (after immersion)                                   | Section   |    16 |
| Change in Breaking Resistance, Burst Strength, Tear |           |       |
| Strength and Adhesion for Coated Fabrics            | Section   |    17 |
| Calculation (of test results)                       | Section   |    18 |

1.10 The values stated in SI units are to be regarded as the standard. The values in parentheses are for information only.

1.11 This standard does not purport to address all of the safety concerns, if any, associated with its use. It is the

| Property               | IRM 901           |
|------------------------|-------------------|
| A                      |                   |
| IRM 902                | IRM 903           |
| Specified Properties:  |                   |
| Aniline Point, °C (°F) | 124 ± 1 (255 ± 2) |
| D611                   |                   |
| Kinematic Viscosity    |                   |
| (mm                    |                   |
| 2                      |                   |
| /s [cSt])              |                   |
| 38°C (100°F)           | ...               |
| D445                   |                   |
| 99°C (210°F)           | 18.12–20.34       |
| Gravity, API, 16°C     |                   |
| (60°F)                 |                   |
| 28.8 ± 1               | 19.0–21.0         |
| Viscosity-Gravity Con- |                   |
| stant                  |                   |
| 0.790–0.805            | 0.860–0.870       |
| Flash Point COC, °C    |                   |
| (°F)                   |                   |
| 243(469) min           | 232 (450) min     |
| Naphthenics,           | C                 |
| N                      |                   |
| (%)                    | 27 (avg)          |
| Paraffinics,           | C                 |
| P                      |                   |
| (%)                    | 65 min            |
| Typical Properties:    |                   |
| Pour Point, °C (°F)    | −12 (10)          |
| D97                    |                   |
| ASTM Color             | L                 |
| Refractive Index       | 1.4848            |
| UV Absorbance, 260 nm  | 0.8               |
| Aromatics,             | C                 |
| A                      |                   |
| (%)                    | 3                 |

A Refer to Appendix X3. Table X3.1 reflects the differences in the properties between ASTM No. 1 Oil and IRM 901 for reference purposes.

| Property         | Method   |
|------------------|----------|
| 2005 Batch       |          |
| COA              |          |
| 2005 Batch       |          |
| Current          |          |
| 2012 Sample Data |          |
| 2012 Batch       |          |
| Average          |          |
| Viscosity, cSt   |          |
| @99°C            |          |
| D445             | 19.58    |
| 18.8             | 18.7     |
| 18.8             |          |
| 18.8             | 18.8     |
| Gravity, API     |          |
| @16°C            |          |
| D287             | 28.6     |
| 28.9             | 28.9     |
| 28.9             |          |
| 28.9             | 28.9     |
| Flash Point      |          |
| COC, °C          |          |
| D92              | 287      |
| 306              | 289      |
| 296              |          |
| 299              | 303      |
| Aniline Point,   |          |
| °C               |          |
| D611             | 123.8    |
| 124.8            | 124.8    |
| 124.5            |          |
| 124.8            | 124.8    |
| D2501            | 0.796    |
| 0.799            | 0.799    |
| 0.799            |          |
| 0.799            | 0.799    |
| Viscosity-       |          |
| Gravity Con-     |          |
| stant            |          |
| Naphthenics,     |          |
| Cn%              |          |
| D2140            | -        |
| 26               | 26       |
| 27               |          |
| 26               | 26       |
| Paraffinics,     |          |
| Cp%              |          |
| D2140            | 70       |
| 71               | 71       |
| 71               |          |
| 71               | 71       |

responsibility of the user of this standard to establish appropriate safety, health, and environmental practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to use.

1.12 This international standard was developed in accordance with internationally recognized principles on standardization established in the Decision on Principles for the Development of International Standards, Guides and Recommendations issued by the World Trade Organization Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) Committee.

## 2. Referenced Documents

2.1 *ASTM Standards:*2
D92 Test Method for Flash and Fire Points by Cleveland
Open Cup Tester
D97 Test Method for Pour Point of Petroleum Products D287 Test Method for API Gravity of Crude Petroleum and
Petroleum Products (Hydrometer Method)

D412 Test Methods for Vulcanized Rubber and Thermoplastic Elastomers—Tension
D445 Test Method for Kinematic Viscosity of Transparent
and Opaque Liquids (and Calculation of Dynamic Viscosity)
D611 Test Methods for Aniline Point and Mixed Aniline
Point of Petroleum Products and Hydrocarbon Solvents
D751 Test Methods for Coated Fabrics
D865 Test Method for Rubber—Deterioration by Heating in
Air (Test Tube Enclosure)
D975 Specification for Diesel Fuel
D1217 Test Method for Density and Relative Density (Specific Gravity) of Liquids by Bingham Pycnometer
D1415 Test Method for Rubber Property—International
Hardness
D1500 Test Method for ASTM Color of Petroleum Products
(ASTM Color Scale)
D1747 Test Method for Refractive Index of Viscous Materials
D2008 Test Method for Ultraviolet Absorbance and Absorptivity of Petroleum Products
D2140 Practice for Calculating Carbon-Type Composition
of Insulating Oils of Petroleum Origin
D2240 Test Method for Rubber Property—Durometer Hardness
D2501 Test Method for Calculation of Viscosity-Gravity
Constant (VGC) of Petroleum Oils
D2699 Test Method for Research Octane Number of Spark-
Ignition Engine Fuel
D3182 Practice for Rubber—Materials, Equipment, and Procedures for Mixing Standard Compounds and Preparing Standard Vulcanized Sheets
D3183 Practice for Rubber—Preparation of Pieces for Test
Purposes from Products
D4483 Practice for Evaluating Precision for Test Method
Standards in the Rubber and Carbon Black Manufacturing Industries
D4485 Specification for Performance of Active API Service
Category Engine Oils
D4806 Specification for Denatured Fuel Ethanol for Blending with Gasolines for Use as Automotive Spark-Ignition
Engine Fuel
D5900 Specification for Physical and Chemical Properties of
Industry Reference Materials (IRM)
D5964 Practice for Rubber IRM 901, IRM 902, and IRM
903 Replacement Oils for ASTM No. 1, ASTM No. 2, ASTM No. 3 Oils, and IRM 905 formerly ASTM No. 5 Oil
E145 Specification for Gravity-Convection and Forced-
Ventilation Ovens
2.2 *SAE Standards:*3
J 300 Engine Oil Viscosity Classification

## 3. Summary Of Test Method

3.1 This test method provides procedures for exposing test specimens to the influence of liquids under definite conditions of temperature and time. The resulting deterioration is determined by measuring the changes in physical properties, such as stress/strain properties, hardness, and changes in mass, volume, and dimension, before and after immersion in the test liquid.

  3.2 The precision statement in Section 20 is based on an
interlaboratory test program run in 1981, using six different
rubbers with ASTM Reference Fuels B, C, D4 and ASTM Oils
No. 1 and No. 3.

  3.3 The precision statement in Appendix X2 is based on an
interlaboratory test program conducted in 1993 to establish
replacements for ASTM Oils No. 2 and No. 3. Because of the
limited number of participating laboratories, only repeatability
could be evaluated, and it was necessary to use pooled values
of four No. 2 type oils (No. 2 plus three candidate replacement
oils) and four No. 3 type oils (No. 3 plus three candidate
replacement oils). Twelve rubbers were tested in this program.

  3.4 ASTM Oils No. 1, No. 2, and No. 3 have been replaced
by IRM 901, IRM 902, and IRM 903, respectively.

## 4. Significance And Use

  4.1 Certain rubber articles, for example, seals, gaskets,
hoses, diaphragms, and sleeves, may be exposed to oils,
greases, fuels, and other fluids during service. The exposure
may be continuous or intermittent and may occur over wide
temperature ranges.

  4.2 Properties of rubber articles deteriorate during exposure
to these liquids, affecting the performance of the rubber part,
which can result in partial failure.

  4.3 This test method attempts to simulate service conditions
through controlled accelerated testing, but may not give any
direct correlation with actual part performance, since service
conditions vary too widely. It yields comparative data on which
to base judgment as to expected service quality.

  4.4 This test method is suitable for specification compliance
testing, quality control, referee purposes, and research and
development work.

## 5. Test Conditions

  5.1 Temperature and Immersion Periods—Unless otherwise
specified the test temperature and immersion period shall be as
indicated in Table 3, depending upon the anticipated service
conditions, unless otherwise agreed upon between customer
and supplier:
  5.1.1 When the temperature of the testing room is other than
the standard 23 6 2°C (73 6 4°F) the temperature of test shall
be reported.
  5.1.2 When the relative humidity (RH %) of the testing
environment is known to effect the performance of a test liquid,
the RH % shall be reported.
  5.1.3 The choice of the immersion period will depend upon
the nature of the vulcanizate, the test temperature, and the

Temperature in °C (°F)
−75 ± 2 (−103 ± 4)
85 ± 2 (185 ± 4)
−55 ± 2 (−67 ± 4)
100 ± 2 (212 ± 4)
−40 ± 2 (−40 ± 4)
125 ± 2 (257 ± 4)
−25 ± 2 (−13 ± 4)
150 ± 2 (302 ± 4)
−10 ± 2 (14 ± 4)
175 ± 2 (347 ± 4)
0 ± 2 (32 ± 4)
200 ± 2 (392 ± 4)
23 ± 2 (73 ± 4)
225 ± 2 (437 ± 4)
50 ± 2 (122 ± 4)
250 ± 2 (482 ± 4)
70 ± 2 (158 ± 4)
Immersion Period, h
22 46 70
166 670
1006 2998 4990

liquid to be used. To obtain information on the rate of
deterioration it is necessary to make determinations after
several immersion periods.
  5.1.4 The tolerance for any immersion period shall be
615 min or 61 % of the immersion period, whichever is
greater.
  5.1.5 The immersion periods enumerated in Table 3 are
frequently used, and are considered standard; however, they
may be varied according to a material's testing requirements or
anticipated exposure in service.

  5.2 Illumination—Immersion tests shall be made in the
absence of direct light.

## 6. Standard Test Liquids

  6.1 For test purposes, it is desirable to use the liquid that
will come into contact with the vulcanizate in service. For
comparative tests with liquids of unknown or doubtful
composition, samples of liquid from the same container or
shipment shall be used. Many commercial products, particu-
larly those of petroleum origin, are subject to sufficient
variation that it is not practical to use them for test liquids. It
is then advisable to use a standard test liquid, such as described
in 6.1.1 and 6.1.2, covering the range of properties that may be
encountered in the particular service.
  6.1.1 IRM and ASTM Oils—The test shall be conducted in
one of the petroleum-base IRM or ASTM oils (Note 1)
specified in Table 1 that has its aniline point nearest that of the
oil with which the vulcanizate is expected to come in contact
in service except as indicated in 6.1.3.

6.1.2 *ASTM Reference Fuels—*When gasolines or diesel fuels are to be encountered in service, the test shall be conducted in one of the ASTM reference fuels (Note 2)
specified in Table 4, except as indicated in 6.1.3.

 NOTE 2—The ASTM reference fuels in Table 4 have been selected to
provide the maximum and minimum swelling effects produced by
commercial gasolines. Reference Fuel A has a mild action on rubber
vulcanizates and produces results of the same order as low swelling
gasolines of the highly paraffinic, straight run type. Reference Fuels B, C,
and D simulate the swelling behavior of the majority of commercial
gasolines, with Reference Fuel C producing the highest swelling which is
typical of highly aromatic premium grades of automotive gasoline.
Reference Fuel F (diesel fuel) swells rubber vulcanizates to a lesser extent
than Reference Fuel B. Reference Fuels G, H, and I are fuel-alcohol
blends (gasohol), which have a stronger swelling action than the corre-
sponding fuel alone, where blends with methanol are more severe than
blends with ethanol. Reference Fuel K, a methanol-rich blend, has a
substantially weaker swelling action than that of the fuel used to prepare
the blend. Reference Fuels I and K are also referred to as M15 and M85,
respectively.
 6.1.3 Service Liquids—Some commercial oils, fuels and
other service liquids (see Table 5) are either non-petroleum or
are compounded from special petroleum hydrocarbon fractions
or mixtures of petroleum hydrocarbon fractions and other
ingredients resulting in materials having properties beyond the
range of the reference fluids listed in Table 1 and Table 4.
Immersion tests of rubber vulcanizates that are to come into
contact with such fluids should be made in the actual service
liquid.
 6.1.4 Water—Since the purity of water varies throughout the
world, all water immersion tests shall be conducted in distilled
or deionized water.

## 7. Preparation Of Specimen

7.1 Except as otherwise specified in the applicable specifications, specimens shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of Practices D3182 and D3183.

## 8. Apparatus

  8.1 For non-volatile liquids, a glass test tube, having an
outside diameter of 38 mm (1.5 in.) and an overall length of
300 mm (12 in.) fitted loosely with a stopper (see 8.2.1) shall
be used. Glass beads shall be used in the liquid as a bumper and
to separate the specimens; refer to 8.3.1 and Fig. 1.

  8.2 For volatile liquids, the test tube described in 8.1 shall
be tightly fitted with a stopper (see 8.2.1) and a reflux
condenser. An air-cooled reflux condenser shall be used for

| Fuel Type        | Composition, Volume %                   |
|------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| Reference Fuel A | Isooctane                               |
| A                |                                         |
|                  |                                         |
| , 100            |                                         |
| Reference Fuel B | Isooctane                               |
| A                |                                         |
|                  |                                         |
| , 70; Toluene    |                                         |
| A                |                                         |
|                  |                                         |
| , 30             |                                         |
| Reference Fuel C | Isooctane                               |
| A                |                                         |
|                  |                                         |
| , 50; Toluene    |                                         |
| A                |                                         |
|                  |                                         |
| , 50             |                                         |
| Reference Fuel D | Isooctane                               |
| A                |                                         |
|                  |                                         |
| , 60; Toluene    |                                         |
| A                |                                         |
|                  |                                         |
| , 40             |                                         |
| Reference Fuel E | Toluene                                 |
| A                |                                         |
|                  |                                         |
| , 100            |                                         |
| Reference Fuel F | Diesel Fuel, Grade No. 2                |
| B                |                                         |
|                  |                                         |
| , 100            |                                         |
| Reference Fuel G | Fuel D, 85; anhydrous denatured ethanol |
| C                |                                         |
|                  |                                         |
| , 15             |                                         |
| Reference Fuel H | Fuel C, 85; anhydrous denatured ethanol |
| C                |                                         |
|                  |                                         |
| , 15             |                                         |
| Reference Fuel I | Fuel C, 85; anhydrous methanol, 15      |
| Reference Fuel K | Fuel C, 15; anhydrous methanol, 85      |

A Motor Fuels, Section 1, Test Method D2699
B Specification D975. C Anhydrous ethanol denatured with unleaded gasoline, Section 4, Performance Requirements, Specification D4806.

| Liquid                                                 | Composition   |
|--------------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| Service Liquid 101                                     |               |
| A                                                      |               |
| di-2 ethyl hexyl sebacate, 99.5 mass %; phenothiazine, |               |
| 0.5 mass %                                             |               |
| Service Liquid 102                                     |               |
| B                                                      |               |
| IRM 901, 95 mass %; hydrocarbon compound               |               |
| additive                                               |               |
| C                                                      |               |
|                                                        |               |
| , 5 mass % (29.5–33.5 mass % sulfur,                   |               |
| 1.5–2.0 mass% phosphorus, 0.7 mass % nitrogen)         |               |
| Service Liquid 103                                     |               |
| D                                                      |               |
|                                                        |               |
| tri-                                                   | n             |
| Service Liquid 104                                     |               |
| E                                                      |               |
| ethylene glycol                                        |               |
| F                                                      |               |
|                                                        |               |
| , 50 volume %; distilled water, 50                     |               |
| volume %                                               |               |
| Service Liquid                                         |               |
| 105                                                    |               |
| G                                                      | ,             |
| ASTM Reference Oil TMC 1006                            |               |
| Service Liquid                                         |               |
| 106                                                    |               |
| I                                                      | ,             |
| ARM 200 (Aerospace Reference Material 200)             |               |

A Service liquid 101 is intended to simulate the swelling action of synthetic diester-type lubricating oils.

B Service liquid 102 approximates the swelling behavior of hydraulic oils. C This hydrocarbon oil additive properties are as follows: Kinematic viscosity
(mm2/s [cSt]) at 99°C (210°F) −9.70 ± 0.52 (Test Method D445); Flash point COC
°C (°F) −45 (113) min (Test Method D92); Density at 16°C (61°F) −1.065 ± 0.015
(Test Method D1217).

D Service liquid 103 simulates phosphate ester-type aircraft hydraulic oils.

E Service liquid 104 approximates the swelling behavior of automotive engine coolant.

F Ethylene glycol, reagent grade, shall be used. G Service Liquid 105 is an API SJ/ILSAC GF-2 SAE 5W-30 reference engine oil meeting the requirements of Specification D4485 and SAE J 300. The sole source of supply known to the committee at this time is ASTM Test Monitoring Center, 6555 Penn Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15206–4489. Fax: (412) 365–1047.

H If you are aware of alternative suppliers, please provide this information to ASTM
International Headquarters. Your comments will receive careful consideration at a meeting of the responsible technical committee,1 which you may attend.

I Service Liquid 106 is intended to eventually replace Service Liquid 101 which is no longer readily available for purchase as a mixture. The sole source of supply of ARM 200 known to the committee at this time is SAE, 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096.

ASTM Oils No. 15,6 and No. 5 and for IRM 9025,6 and IRM
9035,6 at test temperatures of 125°C (257°F) or more. This
condenser shall be a glass tube, approximately 500 mm (20 in.)
or longer, in length and 15 mm (0.6 in.) in outside diameter,
tightly fitted to the immersion tube by means of a stopper (see
8.2.1). The bottom of the condenser tube shall project about 12
mm (0.47 in.) below the stopper. A suitable (water-cooled)
reflux condenser shall be used for water or other low-boiling
liquids. Glass beads shall be used as in 8.1.
 8.2.1 The stopper shall not contaminate the test liquid.
When in doubt, cover the stopper with aluminum foil.

  8.3 Maintaining Test Temperatures—The apparatus and
method chosen to maintain the specified temperature during
immersion testing varies with test conditions, requirements,
and circumstances. Water baths, appropriate temperature trans-
fer oil baths, hot air ovens Note 3, or aging blocks may be used.

 NOTE 3—When hot air ovens are used, it should be noted that
contamination with volatile components of the immersion liquid may
occur. This can affect test results, when the same ovens are subsequently
used for hot air aging.
 8.3.1 The preferred method for elevated-temperature testing
is the use of aging block ovens (test tube type), as they have the
widest temperature capability and are designed specifically for
fluid immersion tests as described in Test Method D865.
 8.3.2 Ovens—Type IIB ovens specified in Specification

E145 are satisfactory for use through 70°C. For higher
temperatures, Type IIA ovens are necessary.
 8.3.2.1 The interior size shall be as follows or of an
equivalent volume:

  Interior size of air oven:
          min
                                300 by 300 by 300 mm (12 by 12 by 12 in.)
          max
                                900 by 900 by 1200 mm (36 by 36 by 48 in.)
   8.3.2.2 Provision shall be made for placing immersion test
tubes in the oven without touching each other or the sides of
the aging chamber and allowing proper air circulation around
them.
   8.3.2.3 The heating medium for the aging chamber shall be
air circulated within it at atmospheric pressure.
   8.3.2.4 The source of heat is optional but shall be located in
the air supply outside of the aging chamber proper.
   8.3.2.5 A recording thermometer located in the upper cen-
tral portion of the chamber near the center of the aging
specimens shall be provided to record the actual aging tem-
perature.
   8.3.2.6 Automatic temperature control by means of thermo-
static regulation shall be used.
   8.3.2.7 The following special precautions shall be taken in
order that accurate, uniform heating is obtained in all parts of
the aging chamber:

  8.3.2.8 The heated air shall be thoroughly circulated in the
oven by means of mechanical agitation. When a motor-driven
fan is used, the air must not come in contact with the fan motor
brush discharge because of danger of ozone formation.
  8.3.2.9 Baffles shall be used as required to prevent local
overheating and dead spots.
  8.3.2.10 The thermostatic control device shall be so located
as to give accurate temperature control of the heating medium.
The preferred location is adjacent to the recording thermom-
eter.
  8.3.2.11 An actual check shall be made by means of
maximum reading thermometers placed in various parts of the
oven to verify the uniformity of the heating.

## 9. Alternative Test Specimens And Dual Level Specimen Hangars

9.1 Alternative specimens to those enumerated in Sections

10, 11, 12, and 14 shall be 25 by 25 by 2.0 6 0.1 mm or 1.0
by 1.0 by 0.079 6 0.004 in. and prepared as described in the
test specimen sections of each.
 9.1.1 The employment of alternative specimens shall be
noted in the report, refer to 19.1.12, or when the specimen
differs in size or configuration from that described in the
procedure.

  9.2 When molded specifically for immersion tests, or as
non-immersed controls, the specimens shall be obtained from
the same (single source) sample.

  9.3 The specimens may be used in performing different
post-immersion tests.

9.4 When employing a dual level specimen hangar (Fig. 1), immersion specimens shall be from a single source (sample) and identical composition. Immersion and specimen suspension shall follow the procedure described in Section 8.

  9.5 When combining specimens of differing configurations,
such as those shown in Fig. 1, on a dual specimen hangar, the
procedure for immersion of each shall be followed. However,
caution must be exercised to assure that the specimens are
completely immersed in the immersion media and it may be
necessary to use more than 100 cm3 (100 mL) of the immersion
media, that is, 150 cm3 (150 mL) as described in Section 15,
and potentially as much as 240 cm3 (240 mL). This shall be
noted in the report, refer to 19.1.12.

## 10. Test Specimens—Change In Mass Or Volume

  10.1 The standard specimen shall be rectangular, having
dimensions of 25 by 50 by 2.0 6 0.1 mm or 1.0 by 2.0 by 0.079
6 0.004 in. Specimens from commercial articles shall be the
thickness of the material as received when they are less than
2.0 mm or 0.079 in.; otherwise they should be reduced to a
thickness of 2.0 mm or 0.079 in. Data obtained on test
specimens having different original thicknesses are not com-
parable.

## 11. Procedure For Change In Mass

11.1 Test three specimens of a single composition. Calculate the test results of the three specimens (see 18.1, Eq 1) and average the results. Weigh each specimen in air to the nearest

1 mg, record the mass as M1 , and immerse in the test tube (see
8.1) containing 100 cm3 of the test liquid (see 11.1.1). Separate
each test specimen from any adjacent test specimen and the
walls of the test tube by approximately 6 mm (0.25 in.), for
example, by perforated glass beads7 as shown in Fig. 1. The
materials used to suspend and separate the specimens shall not
affect the test liquid or the rubber.
  11.1.1 Test liquids shall not be reused.
  11.1.1.1 For non-volatile liquids, condition the test tube
assembly at the specified temperature within the limits given in
5.1 for the specified length of time. A check of the actual
temperature of the test liquid contained in the test tube should
be made to ensure that the liquid is within the test temperature
specified.
  11.1.1.2 For volatile liquids, fit the test tube assembly with
a reflux condenser (see 8.2) and condition at the specified
temperature within the limits given in 5.1 for the specified
length of time. A check of the actual temperature of the test
liquid contained in the test tube should be made to ensure that
the test liquid is within the test temperature specified.

  11.2 After the immersion test has proceeded for the required
length of time, remove the test specimens. If the immersion has
been at elevated temperature, cool the test specimens to room
temperature by transferring them to a cool clean portion of the
test liquid for 30 to 60 min. Then dip the specimens quickly in
acetone (see Note 4) at room temperature, blot lightly with
filter paper free of lint and foreign material, place them
immediately in a tared, stoppered weighing bottle, and deter-
mine the mass after test, M2, of each specimen to the nearest 1
mg. After weighing, again immerse the test specimen in the
same test liquid (see 12.2.1) if data are desired on the
progressive changes that occur with increasing time of immer-
sion. It is important that each manipulation take place promptly
with the least possible lapse of time. When utilizing liquids that
tend to volatilize at room temperature, no more than 30 s
should elapse between removal from the test liquid and
stoppering the weighing bottle.

  11.3 Relatively viscous oils may be difficult to remove from
the specimens with a quick acetone (see Note 4) dip and
blotting or even more vigorous wiping when the specimens are
cooled in the test liquid after immersion; this can yield
erroneous test results. Since these oils do not readily volatilize,
specimens may be cooled by suspending them for about 30 min
in air at room temperature shielded from draft, after removal
from the immersion liquid at the test temperature. This will
allow the majority of the oil to drip off the surface of the
specimen. Then proceed with the acetone (see Note 4) dip and
blotting as described in 11.2. Report when this alternate
method of specimen cooling is used.

## 12. Procedure For Change In Volume

  12.1 Water Displacement Method for Water-Insoluble Liq-
uids and Mixed Liquids—Test three specimens, calculate the
test results for each specimen (see 18.2, Eq 2), and average the
results. Obtain the mass M1 of each specimen (see 12.2.2) in
air, to the nearest 1 mg, and then obtain the mass M2 of each
specimen immersed in distilled water at room temperature.
Quickly dip each specimen in alcohol (methanol or ethanol
(see Note 4)) to remove water (see 12.2.3), blot dry with filter
paper free of lint and foreign material, and place in the
immersion apparatus described in 8.1 or 8.2. Add 100 cm3 of
liquid (see 11.1.1) to the test tube and complete the immersion
test as described in 11.1.1.1 or 11.1.1.2. At the end of the
required immersion period, remove each specimen from the
test tube. Cool the specimens to room temperature by transfer-
ring them to a cool, clean portion of the test liquid for 30 to 60
min, then dip quickly in acetone (see Note 4) at room
temperature, blot lightly with filter paper free of lint or foreign
material, place in a tared, stoppered weighing bottle, weigh,
and record the mass as M3. Remove each specimen from the
bottle, weigh in distilled water, and record the mass as M4 in
immediate consecutive order to determine the water displace-
ment after immersion (see 12.2.2 and Note 5). When data on
progressive changes with increasing time of immersion are
desired, dip each specimen after weighing in alcohol (methanol
or ethanol (see Note 4)) to remove water (see 12.2.3), blot dry
with filter paper free of lint and foreign material, and again
immerse in the same test liquid (see 12.2.1). It is important that
each manipulation following removal of the test specimen from
the test medium take place promptly with the least possible
lapse in time. When utilizing liquids that tend to volatilize at
room temperature, no more than 30 s should elapse between
removal from the test liquid and stoppering the weighing
bottle, and no more than an additional 30 s between removal
from the weighing bottle and immersion in water.

  12.2 Relatively viscous oils may be difficult to remove from
the specimens with a quick acetone (see Note 4) dip and
blotting or even more vigorous wiping when specimens are
cooled in the test liquid after immersion; this can yield
erroneous test results. Refer to 11.3 for an alternate method of
specimen cooling.

 NOTE 4—Acetone, methanol, or ethanol may have an adverse effect on
some materials, it is acceptable to use isopropyl alcohol (IPA) or other
highly evaporative evaporate substance which will not have a deleterious
effect on the material or produce a lasting residue. The use of an
alternative substance shall be reported as described in 19.1.12.
 12.2.1 Report if fresh test liquid is used, which can be a
requirement for certain test methods or specifications.
 12.2.2 It is important that all air bubbles clinging to the test
specimen be removed before weighing in distilled water. If, in
the course of weighing, air bubbles appear on the surface of the
specimen, or the computed volume changes 0.5 % in 5 min, the
specimen is too porous to permit volume determination in this
manner. In that case, the initial volume of the specimen, if the
latter is a simple geometrical solid, can be determined from the
overall dimensions by employing an appropriate mensuration
formula, and the same procedure followed in determining the
volume after the immersion test; or, if volume increase occurs

principally in the thickness dimension, a simple change in
thickness may be substituted for change in volume. If, in the
course of weighing the test specimen floats, AISI No. 316
stainless steel can be used as ballast to immerse the test
specimen in the test liquid. In those cases where ballast is
needed to submerge the specimen, the following procedure
may be used.
  12.2.2.1 Weigh the test specimen with ballast in water,
  12.2.2.2 Weigh the ballast alone in water, and
  12.2.2.3 Determine the difference between weighings, and
proceed with the calculations.
  12.2.3 The acetone (see Note 4) dip before and after
immersion shall be omitted when water is employed as the test
medium.

 NOTE 5—A Jolly balance, adequately shielded from air currents, may be
used for making these determinations. When utilizing liquids that tend to
volatilize at room temperature, no more than 30 s should elapse between
removal from the test liquid and completion of the weighing operation.
 12.3 Displacement Method for Water-Soluble Liquids and
Mixed Liquids (Other Than Water)—For immersion liquids
that are readily miscible with water or react with it, the water
displacement method as described in 12.1 may not be suitable.
For such liquids that are not too viscous or volatile at room
temperature, weighings for M2 and M4 may be made in the
immersion liquid instead of water with weighing for M4 made
in a fresh portion of the immersion liquid. These values are
then used in calculating volume change using Eq 2 in 18.2. If
this is not practicable, the water displacement method shall be
used, except that the final weighing for M4 is omitted and
change in volume is calculated according to Eq 3 in 18.2. This
formula may be only approximate if the immersion liquid is a
mixture, because the density of the absorbed liquid may differ
from that of the bulk. Also the density of any matter extracted
from the rubber may differ from that of the immersion liquid.

13. Dimensional-Change Method for Water-Insoluble
   Liquids and Mixed Liquids
  13.1 Dimensional Change Method—Measure the original
length and width of three test specimens used in 12.1 to the
nearest 0.5 mm (0.02 in.) using an average of three measure-
ments in each direction recording the dimensions as L0 and W0,
respectively. Measure the thickness of each test piece using a
dial micrometer as described in 6.3 of Test Methods D412, and
record as T0. Place specimens in the immersion apparatus
described in 8.1 and 8.2. Add 100 cm3 of liquid (see 11.1.1) to
the test tube and complete the immersion test as described in
11.1.1.1 or 11.1.1.2. At the end of the required immersion
period, remove each specimen from the test tube and bring to
room temperature by transferring them to a cool clean portion
of the test liquid for 30 to 60 min. Dip the specimens quickly
in acetone (see Note 4) at room temperature, blot lightly with
filter paper free of lint and foreign material, and promptly
remeasure as described above, recording the immersed length,
width, and thickness as L, W, and T, respectively. If the
immersion liquid tends to volatilize at room temperature, the
measurements should be completed within 30 s after removing
the test specimens from the liquid at room temperature.
Calculate test results according to Eq 4 in 18.3 and report the
average of three specimens.

## 14. Procedure For Change In Mass With Liquid On One Surface Only

  14.1 Scope—This test method provides a procedure for
exposing
          thin
                sheet
                       materials
                                  (rubber-coated
                                                  fabrics,
diaphragms, etc.) that are in contact with the immersion liquid
on only one surface under definite conditions of time and
temperature.

  14.2 Test Specimen—A disk 60 mm (2.4 in.) in diameter and
thickness of thin sheet or rubber-coated fabric being tested.

14.3 Apparatus—The essential features are illustrated in

Fig. 2 and consist of a base plate, A, an open-ended cylindrical
chamber, B, which is held tightly against the test specimen, C,
by wing nuts, D, mounted on bolts, E. During the test, the
opening in the top of the chamber is tightly closed by a suitable
plug, F.

  14.4 Procedure—Weigh the test specimen in air to the
nearest 1 mg, record as M1, and place in the apparatus as
indicated in Fig. 2. Fill the chamber of the apparatus with the
test liquid to a depth of 15 mm (0.6 in.), replace plug F and
complete the test at the specified conditions as described in 5.1
and 5.2. At the end of the required immersion period, bring the
apparatus to standard room temperature, remove the test liquid,
and release the test specimen. Remove any excess liquid from
the surface by wiping or blotting with filter paper free of lint
and foreign material and place the specimen immediately in a
tared, stoppered weighing bottle. Determine the mass of the
specimen to the nearest 1 mg and record as M2. When the
immersion liquid tends to volatilize at room temperature, no
more than 30 s should elapse between removal of the test
specimen from the liquid and stoppering the weighing bottle.
Use Eq 5 in 18.4 to calculate test results. If more than one
specimen of the same composition is tested, report the result as
the average.

## 15. Procedure For Determining Mass Of Soluble Matter Extracted By The Liquid

  15.1 This test method is applicable for immersions in
volatile-type immersion liquids, such as ASTM reference fuels
(see 6.1.2). Conduct the immersions as described in 11.1,
11.1.1.1, and 11.1.1.2. Test three specimens of a single
composition, and report the result as the average. The extracted
matter can be determined either by the difference in mass of the
specimen before and after immersion or by evaporating the test
liquid and weighing the non-volatile residue (Note 6). The
mass is determined in air to the nearest 1 mg.

                                                      16.2 Immediate Deteriorated Properties—For determining
                                                    the tensile strength, ultimate elongation, and hardness, prepare
                                                    three test specimens from flat vulcanized sheets 2.06 0.1 mm
                                                    (0.08 6 0.004 in.) in thickness (see 10.1) using Die C of Test
                                                    Methods D412. Measure the thickness of each test specimen,
                                                    place the specimens in the test tube described in 8.1, and add
                                                    150 cm3 of liquid (see 11.1.1) to the test tube. Complete the
                                                    immersion period in accordance with 11.1.1.1 or 11.1.1.2. At
                                                    the end of the required immersion period, remove the speci-
                                                    mens from the test tubes and cool immediately to room
                                                    temperature in a fresh sample of the same liquid for 30 to
                                                    60 min. Then quickly dip each sample in acetone (see Note 4)
                                                    and blot lightly with filter paper that is free of lint and foreign
                                                    material and immediately apply bench marks.
                                                      16.2.1 Determine the tensile strength and ultimate elonga-
                                                    tion in accordance with Test Methods D412, using the original
                                                    unimmersed thickness or cross-sectional area (see 18.6, Eq 8).
                                                    Determine the hardness of each immersed specimen in accor-
                                                    dance with Test Methods D1415 or D2240. The time interval
                                                    between removal from the cool liquid and testing shall be not
                                                    less than 2 or more than 3 min.
FIG. 2 Typical Surface Immersion Apparatus

mass difference of specimens before and after immersion can be affected by possible oxidation of the material during immersion. Results obtained by evaporating the test liquid may be affected by partial loss of volatile extracted material during drying. The method of choice will depend on the material under test and the test conditions. For example, the evaporation method would be preferred if further testing is to be done on the extracted matter.

  15.2 Mass-Difference Method—At the end of the required
immersion period, remove the test specimens from the test tube
and dry to a constant mass at a temperature of approximately
40°C (104°F) and an absolute pressure of 20 kPa (150 mm Hg).
Record the original mass of the test specimen before immer-
sion as M1, the mass after immersion as M2, and express the
change in mass as a percentage of the original mass, using Eq
6 in 18.5. Report the results as the average if more than one
specimen of the same composition is tested.

  15.3 Evaporation Method—Transfer the liquid from the test
tube in which the three test specimens have been immersed to
a suitable vessel, wash the specimens in the test tube three
times with 25 cm3 of fresh liquid and transfer the liquid to the
same vessel. Evaporate the liquid and dry the residue to a
constant mass under an absolute pressure of 20 kPa (150 mm
Hg) and a temperature of approximately 40°C (104°F). Record
the sum of the original mass of three specimens before
immersion as ∑M1, the mass of the dried residue as M3, and
express M3 as a percentage of ∑M1, using Eq 7 in 18.5.

## 16. Changes In Tensile Strength, Elongation, And Hardness

  16.1 Original Properties—The original tensile strength, ul-
timate elongation (Test Methods D412, Die C) and hardness
(Test Methods D1415 or D2240) shall be determined, using
three specimens cut from the sheet or article adjacent to those
that are to be immersed in the liquid. Report results in
accordance with the appropriate test method.

  16.2.2 It may be desirable to calculate the tensile strength
based on the swollen cross-sectional area. In that case Eq 9 in
18.6 shall be used. Report when this method of calculation is
employed.

  16.3 Relatively viscous oils may be difficult to remove from
the specimens with a quick acetone (see Note 4) dip and
blotting or even more vigorous wiping when specimens are
cooled in the test liquid after immersion; this can yield
erroneous test results. Refer to 11.3 for an alternate method of
specimen cooling.

  16.4 Properties After Evaporation of Test Liquid—This test
method is applicable for immersions in volatile-type immer-
sion liquids, such as ASTM reference fuels (see 6.1.2). For
determining the tensile strength, ultimate elongation, and
hardness of specimens after evaporation of the immersion
liquid, immerse the specimens in the test liquid in accordance
with 16.2. At the end of the required immersion time, remove
the specimens and, if necessary, cool them to room temperature
in a fresh sample of the same liquid for 30 to 60 min.
  16.4.1 For room temperature drying, suspend the specimens
for 4 6 0.25 h in air at ambient conditions shielded from drafts.
After the drying period apply bench marks and determine
tensile strength and ultimate elongation in accordance with
Test Methods D412 using the original thickness or cross-
sectional area of the untreated specimens (see 18.6, Eq 8) and
hardness according to Test Methods D1415 or D2240.
  16.4.2 For determining properties after complete evapora-
tion of the test liquid, suspend specimens after the 4-h
air-drying cycle at room temperature for 20 h 6 15 min at 70
6 2°C (158 6 4°F) in a circulating-air oven. After the heat
drying cycle, remove the specimens from the oven, allow them
to cool to room temperature and measure the required physical
properties as described in 16.4.1. Report when the heat drying
procedure is used.

  16.5 The tensile strength and ultimate elongation after
immersion and evaporation also can be expressed as percent
change from the original values, using Eq 10 in 18.6, and
hardness in unit change from the original value, according to
Eq 11 in 18.6.

## 17. Changes In Breaking Resistance, Burst Strength, Tear Strength, And Adhesion For Coated Fabrics

  17.1 Original Properties—The original properties for break-
ing resistance, burst strength, tear strength, and adhesion shall
be determined in accordance with Test Methods D751, using
the specified number of specimens cut from the coated fabric
adjacent to those that are to be immersed in the liquid, or, if
necessary, from other pieces of coated fabric that were pro-
duced from the same lot(s) of materials under the same
conditions.

  17.2 Immediate Deteriorated Properties—For determining
breaking resistance, burst strength, tear strength, and adhesion,
prepare the number of specimens specified for each parameter
in Test Methods D751. Place the specimens in the test tube
described in 8.1 and add 150 cm3 of liquid (see 11.1.1) to the
test tube. Complete the immersion test in accordance with
11.1.1.1 or 11.1.1.2. At the end of the required immersion

period, remove the specimens from the test tubes, and cool
immediately to room temperature in a fresh sample of the same
liquid for 30 to 60 min. Then quickly dip each specimen in
acetone (see Note 4) and blot lightly with filter paper that is
free of lint or foreign material. Measure the required physical
properties in accordance with Test Methods D751 (see 18.7).
The time interval between removal from the cool liquid and
testing shall be not less than 2 min or more than 3 min.

  17.3 Relatively viscous oils may be difficult to remove from
the specimens with a quick acetone (see Note 4) dip and
blotting or even more vigorous wiping when specimens are
cooled in the test liquid after immersion; this can yield
erroneous test results. Refer to 11.3 for an alternate method of
specimen cooling.

  17.4 Properties After Evaporation of Volatile Test Liquid—
For determining breaking resistance, burst strength, tear
strength, and adhesion of specimens after evaporation of a
volatile immersion liquid, such as ASTM reference fuels (see
6.1.2), immerse the specimens in the test liquid in accordance
with 16.2. At the end of the required immersion time, remove
the specimens, suspend them for 2 h 6 5 min at ambient
conditions shielded from draft and then place them in a
circulating-air oven at a temperature of 70 6 2°C (158 6 4°F)
for a period of 2 h 6 5 min. At the end of the drying period,
remove the specimens from the oven, allow them to cool to
room temperature and measure the required physical properties
in accordance with Test Methods D751 (see 18.7). The time
interval between removal from the oven and testing shall be not
less than 1 h or more than 2 h.

  17.5 If desired, report results after immersion and evapora-
tion in percent change from the original property values, as
described in 16.5.

## 18. Calculation

18.1 Calculate the percent change in mass as follows
(Section 11):

$$\Delta M,\ \%=\frac{(M_{2}-M_{1})}{M_{1}}.100\tag{1}$$

where:
∆M
     = change in mass, %,
M1
     = initial mass of specimen in air, g, and
M2
     = mass of specimen in air after immersion, g.

  18.2 Calculate the percent change in volume as follows
(Section 12):

$$\Delta V,\,\%=\frac{\left(M_{\,3}-M_{\,4}\right)-\left(M_{\,1}-M_{\,2}\right)}{\left(M_{\,1}-M_{\,2}\right)}.100\tag{2}$$

$$\Delta V,\,\%=\frac{\left(M_{\,3}-M_{\,1}\right)}{d\left(M_{\,1}-M_{\,2}\right)}.100\tag{3}$$

where:
∆V
= change in volume, %,
M1
= initial mass of specimen in air, g,
M2
= initial mass of specimen in water, g,
M 3
= mass of specimen in air after immersion, g,
M4
= mass of specimen in water after immersion, g, and

d
= density of immersion liquid at standard laboratory
room temperature, Mg/m3.
18.3 Calculate the percent change in dimensions as follows
(Section 13):

$\Lambda L$, $\%=\frac{(L-L_{0})}{L_{0}}$.100 (4)

where:
∆L
     = change in length, %,
L0
     = initial length of specimen, mm, and
L
     = length of specimen after immersion, mm.

  Calculate the percent change in width, ∆W, and thickness,
∆T, accordingly.

  18.4 Calculate the change in mass for single surface expo-
sure as follows (Section 14):

$$\Delta M_{{}_{A}},\,\,\mbox{kg/m}\,\,^{2}=\frac{(M_{{}_{2}}-M_{{}_{1}})}{A}.1000\tag{5}$$

where:
∆MA
      = change in mass per unit surface area, kg/m2,
M1
      = initial mass of specimen in air, g,
M 2
      = mass of specimen in air after exposure to the test
        liquid, g, and
A
      = area of the specimen in actual contact with the test
        liquid, mm2.

  18.5 Calculate percent extracted soluble matter as follows
(Section 15):

$$M_{{}_{E}},\ \%=\frac{\left(M_{{}_{1}}-M_{{}_{2}}\right)}{M_{{}_{1}}}.100\tag{6}$$

$$M_{{}_{E}},\ \%=\frac{M_{{}_{3}}}{\sum M_{{}_{1}}}.100\tag{7}$$

where:
ME
       = extracted soluble matter, %,
M 1
       = initial mass of specimen in air, g,
M2
       = mass of specimen in air after immersion and drying,
         g,
∑M1
       = sum of the initial mass of three specimens in air, g,
         and
M3
       = mass of the residue in air after evaporating and
         drying the immersion liquid of three specimens, g.

  18.6 Calculate tensile strength of the specimens both on
immediate deteriorated properties and properties after evapo-
ration of the test liquid as described in the Calculation section
of Test Methods D412.
  18.6.1 Based on the original unstretched cross-sectional
area:

$$T\!S_{o}=\frac{F}{A}\tag{8}$$
18.6.2 Based on the swollen unstretched cross-sectional area:

$$\begin{array}{c}\mbox{TS}_{s}=\frac{F}{A\left(1+\frac{\Delta V}{100}\right)^{273}}\\ \end{array}\tag{9}$$
18.6.3 To express tensile strength and ultimate elongation after immersion as a percentage change from the original properties, use the following formula:

$\Delta P$, $\delta=\frac{P_{i}-P_{o}}{P_{o}}$.100 (10)
18.6.4 Calculate hardness change after immersion in hardness units:

$\Lambda H=H_{{}_{f}}-H_{{}_{o}}$ (11)

where:
TSo
      = tensile stress based on original unstretched cross-
        sectional area,
TSs
      = tensile stress based on swollen unstretched cross-
        sectional area,
F
      = observed force,
A
      = original unstretched cross-sectional area of the test
        specimen before immersion,
∆V
      = volume swell after immersion, %,
∆P
      = change in property (tensile strength and ultimate
        elongation) after immersion, %,
Po
      = original property before immersion,
Pi
      = property after immersion,
∆H
      = hardness change after immersion, units,
Ho
      = original hardness before immersion, units, and
Hi
      = hardness after immersion, units.

  18.7 Calculate breaking resistance, burst strength, tear
strength, and adhesion both on the immediate deteriorated
properties and properties after evaporation of volatile test
liquid as described in Test Methods D751. If desired, results
may also be expressed in percentage change after immersion as
detailed in 18.6.3.

## 19. Report

  19.1 State that the test was conducted in accordance with
Test Method D471 and report the following:
  19.1.1 Description of the sample and its origin,
  19.1.2 Date and temperature of testing room (see 5.1),
  19.1.3 Duration, temperature, and date of vulcanization of
test specimens,
  19.1.4 Dates of the various periods of exposure,
  19.1.5 Immersion liquid used,
  19.1.6 Temperature of exposure,
  19.1.7 Exposure period,
  19.1.8 All observed and recorded data, to include the type of
properties being reported,
  19.1.9 Results calculated in accordance with Section 18,
  19.1.10 Statement of condition of exposed specimens from
visual and manual examination,
  19.1.11 Report which test method was used for determina-
tion of hardness, and
  19.1.12 Any deviations from standard test methods.

## 20. Precision And Bias8

20.1 This precision and bias section deals with property changes in tensile strength, ultimate elongation, hardness, and volume after immersion in test liquids and has been prepared in accordance with Practice D4483. Refer to this practice for terminology and other statistical calculation details.

20.2 The precision results in this precision and bias section give an estimate of the precision of this test method with the materials used in the particular interlaboratory test program as described in the following paragraphs. The precision parameters should not be used for acceptance or rejection testing of any group of materials without documentation that the parameters are applicable to the particular group of materials and the specific testing protocols of the test method.

20.3 A Type 1 interlaboratory test program was evaluated in
1981 using six different vulcanized rubber compounds (materials). These compounds were prepared in one laboratory and test specimens were distributed to nine participating laboratories. Each laboratory prepared and purchased from approved sources, the liquids and fuels, or both, used for testing. A test result (as used for these calculations) is the average of three individual test specimen values. Each laboratory conducted

|                        |            |             |            | Change in Tensile Strength, %   | Change in Elongation,%   | Change in Hardness, Units   |
|------------------------|------------|-------------|------------|---------------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Rubber                 | Within-Lab | Between-Lab | Within-Lab | Between-Lab                     | Within-Lab               | Between-Lab                 |
| Mean                   | Sr         | r           | SR         | R                               | Mean                     | Sr                          |
| ASTM Reference Fuel B: |            |             |            |                                 |                          |                             |
| CR                     | −48.0      | 3.12        | 8.8        | 3.26                            | 9.2                      | −43.7                       |
| FKM                    | −7.9       | 1.94        | 5.5        | 3.55                            | 10.0                     | −0.1                        |
| FVMQ                   | −30.6      | 4.17        | 11.8       | 6.08                            | 17.2                     | −27.1                       |
| NBR-1                  | −63.6      | 2.90        | 8.2        | 4.27                            | 12.1                     | −50.3                       |
| NBR-2                  | −11.8      | 2.59        | 7.3        | 3.75                            | 10.6                     | −16.3                       |
| CO                     | −8.6       | 3.35        | 9.5        | 5.23                            | 14.8                     | −26.0                       |
| Pooled Values          | ...        | 3.07        | 8.7        | 4.47                            | 12.6                     | ...                         |
| ASTM Reference Fuel C: |            |             |            |                                 |                          |                             |
| CR                     | −57.4      | 2.70        | 7.6        | 3.49                            | 9.9                      | −54.2                       |
| FKM                    | −11.1      | 3.32        | 9.4        | 6.34                            | 17.9                     | −0.6                        |
| FVMQ                   | −30.9      | 2.74        | 7.8        | 7.20                            | 20.4                     | −28.4                       |
| NBR-1                  | −68.9      | 2.77        | 7.8        | 4.17                            | 11.8                     | −58.1                       |
| NBR-2                  | −14.8      | 3.78        | 10.7       | 5.15                            | 14.6                     | −21.0                       |
| CO                     | −18.0      | 3.24        | 9.2        | 3.38                            | 9.6                      | −33.9                       |
| Pooled Values          | ...        | 3.10        | 8.8        | 5.16                            | 14.6                     | ...                         |
| ASTM Reference Fuel D: |            |             |            |                                 |                          |                             |
| CR                     | −54.8      | 2.69        | 7.6        | 2.36                            | 6.6                      | −50.9                       |
| FKM                    | −9.2       | 2.26        | 6.4        | 6.00                            | 17.0                     | −0.2                        |
| FVMQ                   | −33.2      | 3.45        | 9.8        | 5.90                            | 16.7                     | −28.5                       |
| NBR-1                  | −67.4      | 2.01        | 5.7        | 4.00                            | 11.3                     | −55.8                       |
| NBR-2                  | −12.4      | 3.05        | 8.6        | 2.56                            | 7.2                      | −18.3                       |
| CO                     | −14.6      | 3.02        | 8.5        | 3.36                            | 9.5                      | −30.0                       |
| Pooled Values          | ...        | 2.81        | 7.9        | 4.29                            | 12.1                     | ...                         |
| ASTM Oil No. 1:        | (Reference |             |            |                                 |                          |                             |
| Table 1                | and        | Table X3.1  | .)         |                                 |                          |                             |
| CR                     | −15.4      | 2.78        | 7.9        | 5.01                            | 14.2                     | −31.3                       |
| FKM                    | −6.1       | 5.25        | 14.8       | 6.11                            | 17.3                     | −9.3                        |
| FVMQ                   | −4.3       | 5.93        | 16.8       | 9.48                            | 26.8                     | −11.9                       |
| NBR-1                  | −18.9      | 3.55        | 10.0       | 6.38                            | 18.1                     | −12.5                       |
| NBR-2                  | −7.7       | 3.38        | 9.6        | 9.67                            | 27.4                     | −70.7                       |
| CO                     | 20.2       | 4.81        | 13.6       | 7.25                            | 20.5                     | −48.5                       |
| Pooled Values          | ...        | 4.43        | 12.5       | 7.52                            | 21.3                     | ...                         |
| ASTM Oil No. 3:        | (Reference | Table 1     |            |                                 |                          |                             |
| .)                     |            |             |            |                                 |                          |                             |
| CR                     | −42.5      | 3.43        | 9.7        | 4.19                            | 11.9                     | −42.0                       |
| FKM                    | −11.3      | 4.27        | 12.1       | 17.20                           | 48.7                     | −2.4                        |
| FVMQ                   | −18.2      | 2.84        | 8.0        | 10.65                           | 30.1                     | −17.9                       |
| NBR-1                  | −37.2      | 5.32        | 15.1       | 12.82                           | 36.6                     | −19.5                       |
| NBR-2                  | −27.0      | 5.67        | 16.0       | 14.64                           | 41.4                     | −69.7                       |
| CO                     | 21.7       | 6.50        | 18.4       | 10.29                           | 29.1                     | −39.7                       |
| Pooled Values          | ...        | 4.85        | 13.7       | 12.33                           | 34.9                     | ...                         |

A Sr = repeatability standard deviation, in measurement units; r = repeatability = 2.83 × Sr; SR = reproducibility standard deviation, in measurement units; and R = reproducibility = 2.83 × SR.

tests (that is, obtained one test result) on each of two days. Both repeatability and reproducibility are therefore short term; a period of a few days separates test results.

20.4 The results of the precision evaluation are given in

Table 6 and Table 7 for each of the six rubbers or materials for
immersion tests in (1) Reference Fuels B, C and D, for 70 h at
23 6 2°C (73 6 4°F), and (2) ASTM Oil No. 2 and ASTM Oil
No. 3 for 70 h at 150 6 2°C (302 6 4°F).

  20.5 The precision is given in terms of Sr, r, SR, and R for
four measured physical properties: (1) percent change in tensile
strength, (2) percent change in ultimate elongation (that is,
percent change in percent elongation), (3) hardness change in
hardness units, and (4) percent change in volume of the test
specimen. No values are given for (r) and (R), the normal
precision parameters used to express relative precision because
numerous average values for properties (1), (2), and (4) are
near zero, thus resulting in extremely large (r) and (R) values.
These large values are essentially meaningless for precision
comparisons when average values are near zero.

|                        |            | Rubber   | Within-Laboratory   | Between-Laboratories   |
|------------------------|------------|----------|---------------------|------------------------|
| Mean                   | Sr         | r        | SR                  | R                      |
| ASTM Reference Fuel B: |            |          |                     |                        |
| CR                     | 66.2       | 0.94     | 2.7                 | 5.40                   |
| FKM                    | 1.5        | 0.36     | 1.0                 | 0.34                   |
| FVMQ                   | 5.1        | 0.48     | 1.4                 | 0.92                   |
| NBR-1                  | 46.9       | 0.38     | 1.1                 | 3.96                   |
| NBR-2                  | 12.0       | 0.73     | 2.1                 | 0.63                   |
| CO                     | 15.6       | 0.39     | 1.0                 | 1.27                   |
| Pooled Values          | ...        | 0.60     | 1.7                 | 2.95                   |
| ASTM Reference Fuel C: |            |          |                     |                        |
| CR                     | 108.9      | 1.04     | 2.9                 | 4.99                   |
| FKM                    | 2.6        | 0.46     | 1.3                 | 0.32                   |
| FVMQ                   | 17.8       | 0.53     | 1.5                 | 1.61                   |
| NBR-1                  | 76.8       | 0.59     | 1.7                 | 3.47                   |
| NBR-2                  | 22.6       | 0.69     | 2.0                 | 0.77                   |
| CO                     | 25.3       | 0.51     | 1.4                 | 0.59                   |
| Pooled Values          | ...        | 0.64     | 1.8                 | 2.60                   |
| ASTM Reference Fuel D: |            |          |                     |                        |
| CR                     | 90.6       | 1.52     | 4.3                 | 3.15                   |
| FKM                    | 2.3        | 0.33     | 0.9                 | 0.56                   |
| FVMQ                   | 15.9       | 0.92     | 2.6                 | 3.05                   |
| NBR-1                  | 62.2       | 1.23     | 3.5                 | 2.10                   |
| NBR-2                  | 18.1       | 1.38     | 3.9                 | 1.55                   |
| CO                     | 20.4       | 0.89     | 2.5                 | 1.25                   |
| Pooled Values          | ...        | 1.11     | 3.1                 | 2.26                   |
| ASTM Oil No. 1:        | (Reference | Table 1  |                     |                        |
| and                    | Table X3.1 | .)       |                     |                        |
| CR                     | 15.8       | 0.50     | 1.4                 | 0.61                   |
| FKM                    | 1.2        | 0.29     | 0.8                 | 1.12                   |
| FVMQ                   | 0.6        | 0.57     | 1.6                 | 1.05                   |
| NBR-1                  | 3.4        | 0.69     | 1.9                 | 1.88                   |
| NBR-2                  | −11.2      | 0.45     | 1.3                 | 0.47                   |
| CO                     | −5.2       | 0.42     | 1.2                 | 0.64                   |
| Pooled Values          | ...        | 0.50     | 1.4                 | 1.67                   |
| ASTM Oil No. 3:        |            |          |                     |                        |
| CR                     | 75.6       | 1.03     | 2.9                 | 1.84                   |
| FKM                    | 3.1        | 1.47     | 4.2                 | 1.97                   |
| FVMQ                   | 2.8        | 0.61     | 1.7                 | 3.75                   |
| NBR-1                  | 31.4       | 0.18     | 1.5                 | 4.21                   |
| NBR-2                  | −2.1       | 0.14     | 2.5                 | 0.67                   |
| CO                     | 4.2        | 0.24     | 0.7                 | 0.77                   |
| Pooled Values          | ...        | 0.88     | 2.5                 | 2.70                   |

A Sr = repeatability standard deviation, in measurement units; r = repeatability = 2.83 × Sr; SR = reproducibility standard deviation, in measurement units; and R = reproducibility = 2.83 × SR.

20.6 The precision of the test method may be expressed in the following statements that use an appropriate value of r and R. The appropriate value is that value of r or R, associated with a mean level in the tables closest to the mean level under consideration for any immersion liquid or rubber, for any test result for a similar material in routine testing operations.

  20.7 Repeatability—The repeatability, r, of this test method
has been established as the appropriate value tabulated in Table
6 and Table 7. Two single test results, obtained under normal
test method procedures, that differ by more than this tabulated
r (for any given level) must be considered as derived from
nonidentical sample populations.

  20.8 Reproducibility—The reproducibility, R, of this test
method has been established as the appropriate value tabulated
in Table 5 through Table 7. Two single test results obtained in

Change in Volume, %

two different laboratories, under normal test method
procedures, that differ by more than the tabulated R (for any
given value) must be considered to have come from different or
nonidentical sample populations.

  20.9 Bias—In test terminology, bias is the difference be-
tween an average test value and the reference (or true) value.
Reference values do not exist for this test method since the
value (of the test property) is exclusively defined by the test
method. Bias, therefore, cannot be determined.

## 21. Keywords

21.1 elevated temperature; fluid immersion; immersion oil;
IRM reference oil; liquid immersion; reference fuel; reference oil; rubber articles; rubber products; service liquid

## Appendixes (Nonmandatory Information) X1. Replacement Of Astm Oils No. 2 And No. 3 With Irm 902 And Irm 903

  X1.1 ASTM Oils No. 2 and No. 3 became subject to cancer
hazard warning label requirements under the OSHA Hazard
Communication Standard, published November 25, 1983. This
contributed to the discontinuation of commercial production in
1990.

  X1.2 ASTM Subcommittee D11.15 on Degradation Testing
began a program in 1985–1986 to establish replacements for
these oils, with the objective to match the action on vulcanized
rubbers as closely as possible, while eliminating the need for
cancer hazard labeling (negative modified Ames Test). An
interlaboratory test program (ITP) was organized in 1993 with
six candidate oils as No. 2 and No. 3 replacements from three
different suppliers, using twelve different types of vulcanized
rubbers. As a result of this ITP, two oils from Calumet
Lubricants Company were selected as best (but not equivalent)
matches for the ASTM oils, and confirmed independently by

## X2. Precision And Bias—Test Program For The Replacement Of Astm Oils No. 2 & No. 3

  X2.1 This precision statement was prepared using data from
the comprehensive ITP evaluation program conducted in 1993
to establish replacement oils for ASTM Oils No. 2 and No. 3.
Because of the limited number of laboratories (three), only
within-laboratory variation or repeatability could be evaluated.
Some terminology used in this appendix is contained in
Practice D4483. Refer to Practice D4483 for background
details.

  X2.2 In the evaluation program twelve compounds were
tested in groups of four; each group of four was tested by three
laboratories. There are only three duplicates (one duplicate set
of tests in each laboratory) for an estimate of within-laboratory
variation for any combination of rubber and oil. This is an
inadequate number of degrees of freedom (DF) for such an
estimate. However, a reasonable assumption may be made that
for any given rubber, the true test variation with each of the
four oils is equivalent. On this basis for any candidate set of the
four oils, the three DF estimates of test standard deviation for
each of the four oils may be pooled to obtain a twelve DF
estimate of test standard deviation. The within-laboratory
precision of this appendix is based on such pooled values.

  X2.3 The precision results are given in Table X2.1 for
percent volume swell. This is the only property that was
evaluated for precision, since it shows the highest sensitivity to
variation.

 X2.4 Table X2.1 lists the repeatability standard deviation,
Sr; the repeatability, r , in units of % volume swell, the relative
repeatability, (r), which is a percent of a percent for volume
swell measurements, and for completeness, the coefficient of
variation, CV, in %. The mean volume swell values range from
                                                      near zero to about 160 %. The precision parameters also
                                                      display a wide range. Regression and graphical analysis reveals

ASTM Subcommittee D11.15 and the SAE Committee on
Automotive Rubber Specifications (SAE-CARS). Calumet No.
2, the replacement for No. 2 oil, provided a closer match than
Calumet No. 3, the replacement for No. 3 oil. The two oils
were established as industry reference materials, IRM 902
(Calumet No. 2, replacement for ASTM Oil No. 2) and IRM
903 (Calumet No. 3, replacement for ASTM Oil No. 3).

  X1.2.1 Details of the ITP are described in Research Report
RR:D11-1069, which can be obtained from ASTM headquar-
ters. A precision statement on volume swells generated in this
test program is given in Appendix X2.

  X1.3 Since the inventory of ASTM Oils No. 2 and No. 3
was depleted by the end of 1993, Committee D-11 published
Emergency Standard ES 27 in 1994 to address the replacement
with IRM 902 and IRM 903.

standard
deviation;
r = repeatability = 2.83 × Sr; (r) = repeatability on relative basis (percent of percent);
and CV = coefficient of variation, % = (Sr/Mean) × 100.
Rubber
Change in Volume, % (Pooled Values)
Mean
Sr
r
(r)
CV
ASTM Oil No. 2 Types:A
ACM
1.3
0.57
1.60
119.0
42.2
AEM
27.8
0.82
2.33
8.4
3.0
CR
36.0
1.63
4.61
12.8
4.5
ECO
3.9
0.58
1.65
42.7
15.1
EPDM
120.2
2.17
6.14
5.1
1.8
EVM
34.1
0.60
1.68
4.9
1.8
FKM
0.7
0.20
0.57
76.5
27.0
FVMQ
0.4
0.31
0.87
198.0
70.0
HNBR
9.4
0.30
0.85
9.1
0.3
NBR
7.6
0.35
0.99
13.1
4.6
TPV
48.4
1.98
5.62
11.6
4.1
VMQ
10.4
1.36
3.84
37.0
13.1
ASTM Oil No. 3 Types:B
ACM
8.3
1.31
3.71
44.6
15.8
AEM
50.3
0.71
2.01
4.0
1.4
CR
68.1
1.15
3.26
4.8
1.7
ECO
7.1
1.22
3.48
48.5
17.1
EPDM
161.5
5.19
14.70
9.1
3.2
EVM
58.7
1.04
2.94
5.0
1.8
FKM
1.6
0.34
0.95
59.1
20.9
FVMQ
2.0
0.43
1.21
59.5
21.0
HNBR
15.9
0.46
1.29
8.1
2.9
NBR
14.8
0.72
2.05
13.8
4.9
TPV
79.5
1.92
5.43
6.8
2.4
VMQ
43.4
2.30
6.52
15.0
5.3

APooled results for No. 2 oil plus three candidate replacements. BPooled results for No. 3 oil plus three candidate replacements.

that (1) there is a direct (positive slope) log-log relationship for
Sr versus mean volume swell, and (2) an inverse (negative
slope) relationship between the relative repeatability (r) and
mean volume swell. These relationships apply to both sets of
data and to the combined data sets.

  X2.5 The results of Table X2.1 may be applied to within-
laboratory data comparisons using either IRM 902 or IRM 903
for any commercial or proprietary compound by selecting the
Table X2.1 rubber closest to the commercial compound and
selecting the level of volume swell value in Table X2.1 closest
to the measured volume swell of the commercial rubber.

## X3. Replacement Of Astm Oil No. 1 With Irm 901

  X3.1 A precision statement has not been prepared due to the
sudden unavailability of ASTM Oil No. 1. The Precision and
Bias statement will be prepared in accordance with Practice
D4483 at the conclusion of the forthcoming interlaboratory test
program.

 X3.2 Table X3.1 reflects the data that was acquired during a
study at the time that ASTM No. 1 Oil was being replaced by

X2.5.1 Two test results of the commercial rubber that differ by more than the tabulated r or (r) values as selected by the above process, must be considered to have come from different sample populations (that is, be significantly different).

X2.5.2 Alternatively normal testing operations should produce values for duplicate test results that are within the r and
(r) intervals as selected by the above process.

  X2.6 Bias reference values do not exist for this type of
testing, since the value of the test property is defined exclu-
sively by the test method. Bias, therefore, cannot be deter-
mined.

IRM 901 and a supply of ASTM No. 1 remained in existence.
It is provided for reference only. The data was obtained in 2005
in a study conducted by Smithers Scientific Services, Akron,
Ohio.

Test
#1
CR
#2
EVM
#3
EPDM
#4
NBR
#5
HNBR
#6
ECO
#7
ACM
#9
AEM
#10
VMQ
#11
TPV
ORIGINAL PROPERTIES
Hardness, Shore A
73
79
74
61
69
72
72
74
64
75
Tensile strength, psi
2877
2863
2153
3208
3818
1977
1990
2267
1295
745
Stress @ 300 % strain
...
...
...
1200
...
...
...
...
1110
...
Elongation at break, %
259 %
155 %
268 %
625 %
262 %
284 %
171 %
284 %
339 %
120 %
IMMERSION - ASTM #1
Hardness, Shore A
66
72
47
59
67
71
68
72
59
63
Tensile strength, psi
2660
2741
1061
3504
4124
2007
2060
2310
1456
666
Stress @ 300 % strain
...
...
...
1580
4070
...
...
...
1190
...
Elongation at break, %
235 %
156 %
133 %
576 %
307 %
233 %
169 %
269 %
350 %
78 %
Change in hardness, points
–7
–7
–27
–2
–2
–1
–4
–2
–5
–12
Change in tensile strength, %
–7.54 %
–4.26 %
–50.72 %
9.23 %
8.01 %
1.52 %
3.52 %
1.90 %
12.43 %
10.60 %
Change in stress @ 300 %, %
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Change in elongation @ break, %
–9.27 %
0.65 %
–50.37 %
–7.84 %
17.18 %
–17.96 %
–1.17 %
–5.28 %
3.24 %
–35.00 %
Change in weight, %
6.17 %
5.90 %
36.63 %
–1.01 %
–0.02 %
–0.31 %
–1.32 %
2.49 %
1.85 %
32.89 %
Change in volume, %
9.89 %
8.10 %
48.18 %
–0.64 %
0.29 %
0.26 %
–1.69 %
4.34 %
2.69 %
35.96 %
IMMERSION - IRM 901 (REPLACEMENT)
Hardness, Shore A
67
73
47
60
68
71
70
72
58
60
Tensile strength, psi
2512
2608
1600
3390
4174
2107
2084
2355
1400
649
Stress @ 300 % strain
...
...
...
1550
4160
...
...
...
1250
...
Elongation at break, %
213 %
131 %
168 %
564 %
302 %
249 %
180 %
274 %
334 %
77 %
Change in hardness, points
–6
–6
–27
–1
–1
–1
–2
–2
–6
–15
Change in tensile strength, %
12.69 %
–8.91 %
–25.69 %
5.67 %
9.32 %
6.58 %
4.72 %
3.88 %
8.11 %
–12.89 %
Change in stress @ 300 %, %
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Change in elongation @ break, %
17.76 %
–15.48 %
–37.31 %
–9.76 %
15.27 %
–12.32 %
5.26 %
–3.52 %
–1.47 %
–35.83 %
Change in weight, %
5.63 %
5.59 %
36.02 %
–1.20 %
–0.26 %
–0.46 %
–1.45 %
1.87 %
2.40 %
30.92 %
Change in volume, %
9.11 %
7.95 %
47.89 %
–0.82 %
0.40 %
0.01 %
–1.29 %
3.65 %
2.27 %
34.32 %
AGING CONDITIONS
TIME
TEMP
#2-EVM
70 h
125°C
#3-EPDM
70 h
125°C
#4-NBR
70 h
100°C
#5-HNBR
70 h
150°C
#6-ECO
70 h
100°C
#7-ACM
70 h
125°C
#9-AEM
70 h
125°C
#10-VQM
70 h
150°C
#11-TPV
70 h
100°C

## X4. Replacement Of Astm Oil No. 5 With Irm 905

X4.1 A Precision and Bias statement will be prepared in accordance with Practice D4483 at the conclusion of the forthcoming interlaboratory test program.

ASTM International takes no position respecting the validity of any patent rights asserted in connection with any item mentioned in this standard. Users of this standard are expressly advised that determination of the validity of any such patent rights, and the risk of infringement of such rights, are entirely their own responsibility.

This standard is subject to revision at any time by the responsible technical committee and must be reviewed every five years and if not revised, either reapproved or withdrawn. Your comments are invited either for revision of this standard or for additional standards and should be addressed to ASTM International Headquarters. Your comments will receive careful consideration at a meeting of the responsible technical committee, which you may attend. If you feel that your comments have not received a fair hearing you should make your views known to the ASTM Committee on Standards, at the address shown below.

This standard is copyrighted by ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959, United States. Individual reprints (single or multiple copies) of this standard may be obtained by contacting ASTM at the above address or at 610-832-9585 (phone), 610-832-9555 (fax), or service@astm.org (e-mail); or through the ASTM website (www.astm.org). Permission rights to photocopy the standard may also be secured from the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, Tel: (978) 646-2600; http://www.copyright.com/