SUPERSEDING 
MIL-E-7194A(ASGJ 
17 MAY 1955 

# Military Standard Electric Power, Aircraft, Characteristics And Utilization Of

--- ---- ---------

# Department Of Defense Armed Forces Supply Support Center Wawmington '1.5, I') T'. Standardization Division Electric Power, Aircral<'""I', Characteristics And Utilization Of Mil-Std-704 6 October 1959

1. This standard has been approved by the Department of Defense and is mandatory for use by the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, effective 6 October 1959. 

2. In accordance with established procedure, the Transportation Corps, Bureau of Aeronautics, and Air Force have been designated, re­
spectively, as Army-Navy-Air Force custodians of this standard. 

3. Recommended corrections, additions, or deletions should be addressed to the Standardization Division, Armed Forces Supply Support Center, Washington 25, D. C. 

## Contents

Page 
1 
1 1 
1. 
1.1 
1.2 
GENERAL 
Scope ................................................ 
. 
Purpose ..••••....•.•.••••••••••.•.••••.••••..••••••• 
2. 
3. 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 3.5 3.6 
3.7 
3.8 3.9 3.10 
3.1 1 
3.1 2 
3.1 3 3.14 3.1 5 3.1 6 
3.1 7 
8.1 8 
1 
1 
1 
1 1 
1 1 
1 
1 
1 1 1 
1 
2 
2 
2 2 
2 
2 2 
APPLICABLE DOCUMENTS •.•.•..•••••.......•..•.•.. 
DEFINITIONS ....••.......•....•.•.••••••..•....•.•• 
Average value •...••.•••..•.•.•...•.•.•.......•••••••• 
Ground .....•...............................•..... , .. 
Transient .....••...••••.•.•.••••.•.•••••..•••.••..•.. 
Total harmonic content ...........•............•.•.••.... 
Frequency modulation ..•........•..................... 
Frequency modulation rate ............................. 
. 
Frequency drift ...................................... 
. 
Frequency drift rate .................................. 
. 
A-<: voltage ....•..•..•...•••.•................••..... 
Voltage modulation ...•.•.•..••••.•..•.••...••••.•.•.•. Voltage modulation frequency characteristics .......•.....• 
Ripple ..................•..•..•.•.•.••.....•....•...• 
Unsafe condition ....•.•.•.••....••••••••..•.•...•.••.• 
Aircraft operation period ••.•.•.•.•.•.•....••.•...•..... 
Utilization equipment . : 
..•.......•..........•..•..•.... 
Category "A" utilization equipment •••.•..•.....•...•..•. 
Category "B" utilization equipment •••.................•. 
Category "C" utilization equipment .•.•.•.••......••.••.• 
2 
·2 
2 2 
2 
4. 
4.1 
4.1.l 
4.1.2 
4.2 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS ..•••.•.•.•......•........ 
Power systems ....................................... 
. 
A-e power ......••••.•.....•.•••••....•..•.....••.. 
D-e power •.••..•.•..•.••....•••••••.•.•.••.••.••• 
Utilization equipment .••..•.•••.•.•.•..•...•.••...••.•. 
5. 
6.1 
2 2 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 3 
3 
Line-to-neutral .................................... 
. 
Line-to-line ...............•.•••..•.•..•..••..•..••• 
Steady-state voltage ...........•••.••.•.••••••••.••• 
Single phase ............. ; ........................ 
. 
Three phase ...................................... 
. 
Phase displacements ............................... 
. 
Unbalance ................••.•............•••••••• 
Wave form .......•......•...•.••..••.•.•......•••• 
Modulation ....................................... 
. 
Amplitude ...................................... 
.. 
Frequency characteristics ........................... 
. 
Transient voltage .................................. 
. 
DETAIL REQUIREMENTS .......................... 
.. 
A-e power system characteristics .. 
; 
•..•.•.••.••••••••..• 
6.1.1 
6.1.2 
5.1.3 
6.1.3.1 
6.1.3.2 
5.1.3.3 
5.1.3.4 
5.1.3.5 
5.1.3.6 
5.1.3.6.1 
5.1.3.6.2 
6.1.4 

## Contents (Continued)

Page 
3 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 7 
7 
7 7 
8 
8 
8 
8 8 8 8 
5.1.4,1 
5.1.4.2 5.1.5 
5.1.5.1 
5.1.5.2 
5.1.5.3 
5.1.6 
5.1.6.1 
5.1.6.2 
5.1.
7 
5.2 
5.2.1 
5.2.2 
5.2.2.1 
5.2.3 5.2.3.1 
5.2.3,2 
Normal electric-system operation ..•.•................. 
Abnormal electric-system operation •.•••••..•.•...•••.. 
Steady-state frequency ....••••.. 
· 
..•......••........• 
Drift ........................................... 
.. 
Modulation amplitude ....•.•.•.••.••.••••...•.•.••.• 
Modulation rate ................................... 
. 
Transient frequency ............................... 
. 
N 
onnaJ electric-system operation ..................... 
. 
Abnormal electric-system operation ...............•..• 
Phase sequency .................................. 
.. 
D--e power system characteristics ....................... 
. 
Steady-state voltage ........................•..•.•.. 
Ripple .......• 
· 
.....•.......•..••••............... , 
Frequency characteristics ............................ 
. 
Transient voltage .................................. 
. 
Normal electric-system operation •.•.•.........••.•.•.• 
Abnonnal electric-system operation ..••...........•••• 
8 8 8 8 
1 1  
1 1  
1 1  
1 1  
1 1  
1 1  
1 1  
12 
1 2  
1 2  
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 12 
12 
12 
Power types ..................................... , ... 
. 
Conversion .......................................... 
. 
A-c to 2 8  volts de ................................. 
. 
Normal electric-sysS ope.cation ........................ 
. 
Abnormal electric-system operation .....................• 
Other electric-system operation ........................ 
.. 
Voltage transients ....•.....•••...............•....•.•• 
Warmup ......•.......•...........••...............•. 
Influence on electric system ............................ 
. 
Self-modulation ....•........•....•......•.......... 
A-c power ............................. , .. -.. , - • 
- 
- • 
.. 
Three phase ...................................... 
. 
Sin.gJo ph2cto ........ , . , . , .. , 3. 
, , .. , , , , . , .......... 
. 
Phase balance .................................... 
.. 
Power factor ..................................... 
. 
Phase failure ..................................... 
. 
Power failure ................•..............•.... - , , - , 
Standby power ....................................... 
. 
Power tolerance ...................................... 
. 
Power requirements data (Required for Navy equipment only) 
Sam 
pie form .......................•..............• 
6. 
UTILIZATION OF AIRCRAFT ELECTRIC POWER-....•. 
6.1 
6.2 
6.2.1 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 
6.6 6.
7 
6.8 6.8.1 
6.9 
6.9.1 
6.9.2 
6.9.3 
6.9.4 
6.9.5 
6.10 6.1 1 
6.12 
6.1 3 
6.1 3.1 
1 5  
1 5  
17 
17 
17 
17 
17 
NOTES .............................................. 
. 
Normal electric-system operation ....................... 
. 
Abnormal electric-system operation ....................•. 
Emergency electric-system operation .................... 
. 
Reference voltage ....................•................. 
Reference frequency .................................. -
ConYersion of a transient to its evaluated step function loci 
.. 
. 
7. 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
7.6 

Source: http://assist.dla.mil -- Downloaded: 2023-07-10T12:04Z
Check the source to verify that this is the current version before use.

## Contents (Continued)

7.6.1 
7.7 
7.8 
7.9 
7.9.1 
7.9.2 
7.9.3 
7.9.4 
Fault traJ>.sients ..........•.•...•.........••.•...... 
Line drop compensation ............................... . 
Equipment detail specification .......................... 
. 
Assumptions ........................................ 
. 
Smallest primary electric system ...........•...•...... 
Electric-system balance ............................. 
. 
Generating-system characteristics ..•.......•..•.•..... 
Electric-system characteristics ..........•............. 
Page 
17 
19 
19 
19 
19 
19 
20 20 
7.9.5 
NoI'D181 ioading .•..•............ . 
. . . 
. 
- 
. 
. . . 
. 
. 
. 
. . . . 
. . 
20 
7.9.6 
Initial warmup . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. - • . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
- 
. 
. 
. 
- 
. 
- 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
20 
7.9.7 
System power factor . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
- 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
- 
. 
- . 
- 
. 
. 
- 
. 
. 
. 
- 
20 
7.9.8 
Power-system rating . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
- 
. 
. 
- 
. 
- 
. 
- 
20 
FIGURES 
1. 
Frequency characteristics of a-c voltage modulation envelope . 
. 
4 
2. 
Transient a-c voltage step function loci limits - 
- 
- 
. 
. 
. 
- 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
5 
3. 
Transient frequency lilnits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. - . - • - 
6 
4. 
Diagram of phase sequency and line designations . 
- . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
7 
a. 
Frequency characteristics of ripple in 28-volt d-c electric 
systems . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
- 
- 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
9 
6. 
Transient d-c voltage step function loci limits . 
. 
. 
. . . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
10 
7. 
Unbaiance iimits for &-phase utilization equipment . . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
13 
8. 
Lagging power factor limits for utilization equipment . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
14 
9. 
Sample form for submittal of power requirements data . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
16 
10. 
Sample conversion of an overvoltage transient· to its evaluated 
step function loci .. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.. . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. . . - . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
18 
11. 
Standard MIL-STD-704 power utilization checklist . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
19 
I. 
II. 
3 
8 
TABLES 
Steady-state a-c voltage limits .......................... 
. 
Steady-state d-c voltage limits .......................... 
. 

## Military Standard Electric Power, Aircraft, Characteristics And Utilization Of I. Gjo:Nerai,

  l.l Scope. This standard delineates the 
characteristics of electric power to be SUJ>­
plied to airborne equipment at the equipment 
terminals and the requirements for the utili­
zation of such electric power by the airborne 
equipment. 

  3.5 Frequency modulation. Frequency mod­
ulation is the cyclic or random dynamic vari­
ation, or both, of instantaneous frequency 
about a mean frequency during steady-state· 
electric-system operation. The frequency 
modulation is normally within narrow fre­
quency limits and occurs as a result of speed 
variations in a generator rotor owing to the 
dynamic operation of the rotor coupling and 
drive speed regulation. 

  3.6 Frequency modulation rate. The fre­
quency modulation rate is the rate of change 
of frequency owing to frequency modulation 
when plotted against time. 

  1.2 Purpose. The purpose of this standard 
is to foster compatibility between aircraft 
electric systems and airborne utilization 
equipment to the extent of confining the air­
craft electric power characteristics within 
definitive limits and restricting the require­
ments imposed on the electric power by the 
airborne utilization equipment. 

## 2. Applicabj,E Documents

  3. 
     7 Frequency drift. Frequency drift is the 
extremely slow and random variation in fre­
quency within the steady-state limits occur­
ring as a result of environmental effects amt 
wear on the electric power-drive system. 

## 2.L Nol Applicable. :1. Dejo'Lnitions

   :1.8 Jo'requency drift rate. The frequency 
drift rate is the rate of change of frequency 
owing to frequency drift when plotted 
against Um.,, 

  3.1 Average value. The average value of 
phase quantities is the arithmetical sum of 
the phase values divided by the number of 
phases. 

  3.9 A-c voltage. The a-c voltage values 
stated herein shall be for any phase of those 
supplied utilization equipment. a phase being 
considered a line to neutral. All a-c voltage 
\"alues are root mean square (rms) ,•alues. 

  3,2 Ground. The primary aircraft structure 
is the referenced ground for the negative of 
the de and the neutral of the ac in the power 
generntion and power utilization systems. 

    :i.:i Transients. A transient is the chang­
ing condition of a characteristic which goes 
beyond the steady-state limits and returns 
to the steady-state limits within a specified 
time JJP,iiod. 

  3.10 Voltage modulation. Voltage modula­
tion is the cyclic variation or random d)•­
namic \"ariations, 01· both, about an average 
of the a-c peak voltage during steady-state 
electric-system operation such as caused by 
voltage regulation and speed variations. The 
modulation envelope is formed by a continu­
ous curve connecting each sine wave peak to 
the successive sine wave peak. 

  3.4 Total harmonic content. The total har­
monic content of a complex wave is the total 
nns voltage remaining when the fundamental 
component is removed. 

  3.11 Voltage modulation frequency char­
acteristics. The frequency characteristic of 

voltage modulation is defined as the compon­
ent frequencies which make up the modula­
tion envelope wave form. 

During operation, voltage limits include al­
lowance for 8 volts a-c line drop or 2 volts d-c line drop, or both. 

## 4. General Requirements

:1.12 Ripple. Ripple is the a-c variation of voltage about a fixed d-c voltage during steady-state d-c electric-system operation. 

  4.1 Power systems. Characteristics of air­
craft power at the input terminals of utili­
zation equipment shnll be within the limits 
stated in section 5 under the conditions of 
power utiiization prescribed by section 6. 

   :1.13 Unsafe condition. An unsafe condition 
is any condition within aircraft that jeopar­
dizes the sa:i'ety of the aircraft and the per­
sonnel aboard. 

   :1.14 Aircraft operational period. The oper­
ational period of an aircraft is defined as the 
time interval between the start of prepara­
tion for flight and the post flight engine 
shutdown with consequent deactivation of 
the aircraft electric system. 

  4.1.1 A-c power. The a-c power system shall 
he a _3-phase, 4-wire "Y" system, having a 
nominal voltal!'.e of 115 /200 and a nominal 
frequenc)· of 100 cps. The neutral point of the 
source of power is connected to ground (see 
3.2) , and the ground is considered the fourth 
conductor. 

 ' :J.15 Utilization equipment. Utilization 
equipment will be considered as comprising 
either an individual unit, set, or a complete 
system to which the electrical power is ap­
plied or disconnected, or both, as a whole. 

   4.1.2 D-c power. The d-c power system shall 
be a 2-wire, grounded system having a nomi­
nal voltage of 28 volts. The negative of the 
power source is connected to ground and the 
ground is considered the second wire. 

  3.16 Category "A" utilization equipment; 
Category "A" equipment are those utiliza­
tion equipments whose installation in aircraft 
will be controlled so that line drops will be 
limited to 2-volts a-c line drop or ½-volt de, 
or both. The line drop is the voltage differ­
ence between the point ·of voltage regulation 
."'A +ho 'nl'\,nrn,.. .;ttnn 
                  .. +o_...,..;..,,QJc,, n-l +J..o onnln__ 
U,111,.1 
    1,11,;; pvnic;J. 1-upui, "1[;.I.J.UUIQIO 
                              V.L 1,u.:. '-''{U.l.}'-
ment. Use of this category should be held to 
a minimum. and its use will be subject to 
approvl\l by the procuring activity. 

  4.2 Utilization equipment. Utilization equip­
ment shall maintain specified performance, 
using the power with characteristics which 
are listed in section 5. When use of power 
is required having other characteristics or 
narrower tolerances than specified herein, the 
conversion to other characteristics or closer 
tolerances shall be accomplished as a. part of 
the utilization equipment. Utilization equip­
ment designed for a specific aircraft applica­
tion may deviate from these requirements 
only upon approval of the procuring activity. 

## 5. Detail Requirements 5.1 A-C Power System Characteristics.

5.1.1 *Line-to-neutral:* Characteristics of line­
to-neutral power shall be within the limits specified herein. 

  5.1.2 Line-to-line. Characteristic.
                                       s of line-to­
line power shall be as a result of line-to-neu­
tral characteristics being as specified, 

  :i.17 Category "B;; utiiization equipmeni. 
Category "B" equipment are those utilization 
equipments destined for aircraft for which 
the line drops will be less than 4 volts ac or 
1 volt de, or both. When a detail equipment 
specification does not designate a category, 
the equipment will be considered a category 
"B" equipment. 
  :us Category "C" utilization equipment. 
Category "C" equipment are those equip­
ments which are intermittently operated. 
z 
 j 

| Mode      |
|-----------|
| nperatlon |
Sina-le-phae limits 
Average or a ph 
... limit. 
------
·····-
Normal 
E.,......., 
Nonna! 
-.,,., 
Category II A" 
109,5 to 119.5 
107 to 122 
110.5 to 117.5 
108 to 120 
Category 11B" 
107.5 to 119.5 
105 to 122 
108.5 to 117.5 
106 to 120 
. 
Category "C" 
103.5 to 119.5 
101 to 122 
104.5 to 117.5 
102to 120 

{c) Individual harmonic content: 3 per­
cent of the · fundamental {rms) 
with linear loads, or 4 percent of 
the fundamental (rms) with non­
linear loads, when measured with 
a harmonic analyzer. 

  5.1.3 Steady-state voltage. The steady-state 
phase voltage shall be within the limits of 
table I. These limits are applicable during 
380- to 420-cps operation. Modes of electric­
system operation shown in table I and sub­
sequent are explained in section 7. 
                                          Utilization 
equipment categories shown in table I and 
Anhɤ1111nt. 11. rlPfinPd in R.ɥtion 3. 

5.i.:i.6 M 
          oduiaiion. 

  5.1.3.1 Single phase. The steady-state volt­
age for a single phase shall be within the 
limits of table I. 

  5.1.3.2 Three pluu,e, The steady-state volt­
age average for the three phases shall be 
within the limits of table I. 

  5.1.3.6.1 Amplitude. The modulation of volt­
age (see 3
            .10) shall not exceed an amplitude 
of 3.5 volts when measured as the peak-to­
valley difference between the minimum voltage 
reached and the maximum voltage reached on 
the modulation envelope over a period of at 
least 1 second. A sketch of voltage modulation 
is shown in fignre 1. 

  5.1.3.3 Pluu!e displacements. The displace­
ment between adjacent phases shall be within 
the limits of 1 20° ± 1.5°. 

  5.1.3.6.2 Frequency c1uu-act6ristia. The fre­
quency components of the voltage modulation 
envelope wave form (see 3.11) shall be wit.
                                            liin 
the limits specified in figure 1. 

   º-1 
      -»--' 1T-t1.hnln.'IJ.J'"¼. 
                            ¥
                             ...axL
                                  Y?!um spro
                                               ....ad 
                                                      in 
phase voltages shall be less than 3 volts be­
tween the phase with the highest voltage and 
the phase with the lowest voltage for all air­
craft operations. 

  5.1.3.5 Wa,,e form. The voltage wave form 
shall be within the following limits : 
     (a) Crest factor: 1.41 ± 0.1. 

   5.1.4 Transient voltage. Voltage transients, 
when converted to their evaluated step func­
tion loci ( 
             see 7. 
                     6) 
                       , shall be within the limits 
of figure 2 for all operations of the aircraft 
electric system. The most severe phase tran­
sient shall be used in determining conform­
ance to figure 2. 

  5.1.4.1 Normal electric-system opera.tum. 
The evaluated step function loci of the a-c 
voltasre transients for all nonnal electric-sys­
tem -;;perations shall be within the limits 2 
and 3 of figure 2. 

(b) Total harmonic content: 4 percent 
of the fundamental ( 
rms) with 
linear loads, or 5 percent of the 
fundamental (rms) with non­
linPo.l' loads, who,n mea.
•nrl!d with 
a distortion meter as distortion of 
the fundamental frequency. 
Check the source to verify that this is the current version before use.

  5.1.5.3 Modulation rote. Rates of frequency 
change (see 3.6) owing to frequency modula­
tion shall be not greater than 13 cps per 
----!--1 
secono. 

  5.1.4.Z Abnonnal eŠctric-aystem opertitioft. 
The evaluated step function loci of the a-c 
voltage transients which result from abnormal 
eieciric- system operation shaii be iess than 
the limits 1 and 4 of figure 2. 

  :;.1.5 Steady-state freqUency. The a-c power 
srstems frequency shall be maintained at 400 
± 20 cps for steady-state operation. 

  5.1.6 Transient ;requency. Frequency trans­
sients shall be contained within the limits of 
figure 3 for all aircraft operations. Rates- of 
frequency change during a transient shall not 
exceed 500 cps per second for any period 
longer than 15 milliseconds. 

  5 
   .. 
    1.6.1 NOT'rflnl el.eclrt
                           :.C - S'I
                                JBt-em šinn.. 
Frequency transients as a result of normal 
system operations ( 
                       see 7 
                             .1) shall be within 
the limits of 2 and 3 of figure 3. 

  5.1.5.1 Drift. Variation within steady-state 
frequency limits owing to drift (see 3.7) shall 
M nnf. Wln..-a H
              ,
                !!Ion _,_ ' ,.na #n,,,. o:nv nA'P:M n-1 
"""' ... 
    v.. ............... ...."'"'.... ...:.... V "Y"' 
                            ,L
                             V
                              ,L
                                -•J ...,...... .......... ... 
                                             .. 
steady-state electric-system operation. Fre­
quency variation owing to drift shall not occur 
at a rate (see 3.8) greater than 15 cps per 
minute. 

  5.i.6.2 Abnormal eiectric-81J8iem operation. 
Frequency transients as a result of abnormal 
electric-system operations (see 7.2) shall be 
within the limits 1 and 4 of figure 3. 

   5.1.5.Z Modulo.tion amplitude. Vru:ia.tions of 
frequency owing to frequency modulation (see 
3.5) during any 1-minute period shall be with­
in a band of ± 2 cps about a mean frequency. 
The· mean frequency may drift within the 
limits defined by 5.1.5.1. 

  5.1.7 Pluue sequence. The electric distribu­
tion and utilization systems shall have a phase 

ea_,.. 
Start wa.rmup1 
Takeoff 
dimb 
Landln21 
Emergenq 
5 min m.&Ji::i: 
cnilse-eombat1 
5 miD Jrullt
1 
"A" 
21.5 to 29 
25.5 to 28.5 
21.5 to28.5 
17.5 to 29  
UB" 
21 
to 29 
25 to 28.5 
21 to 28.5 
17 to29 
"C" 
20 to 29 
24 
to 28.5 
20 to 28.5 
16 to 29 

1 TbÕ Uowd condition3 of aircraft operation arie wiU!.in \he normal mode of dcctric-syatem operaLkm. 

   1 After 5 mi.ttuta of start and warmup aireralt operation, the •t.ead7
                                                                                                                      --
                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                        d:ate ftlltq-e UmJt.s .baJJ be tnthln th• nmJta speciJ.ed 
for takeoff operatioL 
   ' When aircraft la:ndina operations have durations exceedin.c 5 minutff. the wider voltaee limits aJlowed for landlna shall bot 
remain beyond the Hmlb allowed for Cl"Uise for more tban 5 minutes. 

sequence of A, B, C corresponding to T, - T, 
- T, of the power source. Figure 4 diagrams 
this relationship. 

## 5.2 D-C Power System Characteristics.

   5.2.3.2 Almormal eT.ectric-system operation. 
The evaluated step function loci of the d-c volt­
age transients which result from abnormal 
electric-system operation shall be less than the 
limits 1 and 4 of figure 6. 

## 6. Utilization Of Aircraft Electric Power

5.2.1 *Steady-state voltage.* Steady-state volt­
age shall be within the limits specified in table II. 

  5.2.2 Ripple. The a-c peak of ripple voltage 
to average d-c voltage (see 3.12) shall be less 
than 1.5 volts, when measu1·ed with a peak 
reading vacuum tube Yoltmeter in series with 
a 4.0 microfarad capacitor. The higher of the 
two Yalues measured when the voltmeter is 
successively connected for each of two polari­
ties shall be considered the ripple voltage. 

  6.1 Power types. The utilization equipment 
specification shall specify as shown in 6.13.1 
which of the types of power listed herein is 
required. The equipment may require one or 
both of these types of power. No other types 
of input power shall be used without written 
permission from the procuring activity. It is 
preferred that equipment be required to use, 
where practicable, only the a-c type of power 
listed herein. 

  5.2.2.1 Frequenc,
                      J characteristics. The fre­
quency components of the ripple shall be with­
in the limits of figure 5 when measured as 
conducted interference. 

  6.2 Conversion. Equipment which requires 
conversion of input power to power with 
other characteristics shall accept the power 
as defined herein for modification and use. 
:Modification and use shall be integral with 
the utilization systems or utilization equip. 
ment. 

   5.2.3 Transient voltage. Voltage transients, 
when converted to their evaluated step func­
tion loci, shall be within the limits of figure 
6 for all operations of the aircraft electric 
system. 

  6.2.1 Ac to 28 volts de. Utilization equip. 
ment of a size to require a-c input power above 
500 va may include integral static converters 
to obtain up to 5 amperes of 28-volt d-c power 
in lieu of requiring the 28-volt d-c power speci­
fied herein. 

   ,;.2.3.1 N 
             01-mal electric- S'!fstem operation. 
The evaluated step function ioci of the d-c 
voltage transients for all normal electric-sys. 
tern operations shall be within the limits 2 and 
3 of figure 6. 

8 

-- · ·· ····.·.·.·.· ,,-·· 

(1) Recover automatically to speci­
fied performance, unless the 
detail specification for a 
given utilization equipment 
permits manual reset of equipment after the abnor­
mal electric-system operation. 
(2) Have negligible effect on reli­
ability owing to.the abnormal 
electric-system operation. 
6.5 Other electric-system operation. While 
the electric system operates in regions of 
characteristics other than specified in section 
5, utilization equipment shall: 
(a) Not be required to perform. 
(b) Not be required to perform after 
return of the electric system into the regions of characteristics spe­ cified in section 5. 
6.3 Nonna! electric-system operation. Dur­
Ing normal operation of the electric system 
(see 5 .1.3, 5.1.4.
1, 5.1.5, 5.1.6
.1, 5.2.1, and 
5
.
2
.
3
.
1), utilization equipment shall: 
(a) Provide 100-percent performance, 
except when the detail specifica­
tion for a given utilization equip­ ment defines specific regions of 
the electric system characteris­ tics with corresponding degrees 
of performance degradation (see 
7.8). 
(b) Remain safe. 
(c) When degraded performance has 
been permitted for given regions 
of given characteristics, after op­
eration in such regions with re­
turn to other regions of normal 
electric-system operation, the uti­
lization equipment shall: 
(1) Automatically recover to 100-
percent performance. 
(2) Remain unaffected in reliabil­
ity. 

  6.6 Voltage transient& For the purpose of 
testing performance of utilization equipment 
during conditions of input voltage transients, 
voltage transients shall be considered as any 
voltage at its corresponding time on the 
limits of figures 2 and 6. 

  6.7 Warmup. Time required for equipment 
to warmup prior to obtaiuing specified per­
formance shall be kept to a minimum. Time 
to return to specified performance, after a 
power interruption, shall not exceed the ac­
tual thermal or mechanical requirements, or 
both. Warmup shall be less than Ii minutes 
unless approved in writing by the ;1rocuring 
activity. 

   6.8 Infliience on electric system. There 
 shall be no influence by utilization equipment 
. on the characteristics of power at the input 
 to its terminals which would cause these 
 characteristics to go beyond the limits speci­
 fied in section 5. 

  6.8.1 Self-modulation. The modulation in­
duced by varying loads within utilization 
equipment shall not, at the terminals of the 
utilization equipment, cause voltage modula-

6.4 Abnormal electric - system operation. 
During abnormal operation of the electric­
system (see 5.1
.4.2, 5.1.6
.2, and 5.2.
8
.2) utili­
zation equipment: 
(a) Shall have no performance require­
ments, unless the detail specifica­
tion for a given utilization equip­
ment requires specific degrees of 
performance to be maintained 
within specific regions of the elec­
tric-system characteristics (see 
7.8). 
(b) Shall remain safe. 
(c) May have momentary loss of func­
tion; however, this momentary 
loss shall not affect later equip­
ment performance. 
(d) After abnormal operation of the 
electric system and with return 
of the electric system to normal 
operation, utilization equipment 
shall: 

tion or ripple to go beyond the limits of 
5.1.3.6 and 5.2.2. This self-modulation is caus­
ed by variations in the cunent required by 
the equipment, in turn causing a varying 
voltage drop in the wiring of the power cir­
cuit to the equipment. 

  6.10 Power failure. For those equipments 
which require both a-c and d-c power, one 
of these power sources may fail. Failure of 
one power source shall not result in an unsafe 
condition. Dm1ng the loss of the one power 
source, no equipment performance is re­
quired. 

## 6.9 A-C Power.

  6.11 Standby power. For those modes of 
equipment operation in which performance is 
not required but power is required to main­
tain equipment standby readiness, the stand­
by power requirement should be kept to a 
minimum. 

  6.9.1 Thrne pluu!e. For loads less than 500 
\'a, 3-phase power shall be used when prac­
ticable. For a-c input demands exceeding 500 
va, 3-phase power shall be required. The aver­
age of three phase3 steady-state voltage limits 
in table I are applicable only when a phase of 
the three phases is not utilized as a single­
phase load. 

  6.12 Power tolerance. Input power require­
ments shall not vary by more than + 10 per­
cent and - 10 percent of an established limit 
between production units of a given utilization 
equipment. The specified tolerance !i
                                 '?lits do not 
include changes in equipment power demands 
as a result of engineering changes made dur­
ing production. 

  6,9.2 Single plw,..-e. For a-c input demands 
not. 1>:xr.PP<ling fi.00 vЀ, it. i!-t ::a.l1nw::1hfo for thP 
equipment to require single-phase power. 
Equipment which is inherently single phase 
in power consumption shall present, if practic­
able, a three-phase demand by being internally 
Seg
   regated into three single-phase loads. Sin­
gle-ph!'.l>e power shall be used only on a line-to­
neuti-al basis. 

   6.9.3 Pluu!e balance. Equipment requiring 
three-phase power shall require equal phase 
volt-amperes and power factor insofar as 
practicable. The phase volt-ampere difference 
between the highest and lowest phase values, 
assuming balanced voltages, shall be less than 
the limits specified in figure 7. 

6.i3 Power requirements oata ( 
required 
for Nayy equipment only). Power require­
ment data shall be submitted to the procur­
ing activity. The data shall be successively 
submitted as soon as available based on: 
(a) Specification requirements. 
(b) Preliminary design data for the 
equipment. 
(c) Measurements made on the first 
models. 
( 
d) Measurements made on representa­
tive production units. 
( 
e) Power requirements revisions caus­
ed 
by proposed equipment changes. 

  6.9.4 Power factor. Equipment utilizing a-c 
power shall be designed to present as near a 
unity· power factor as practie.able for all mod.es 
of equipment operation. The fully loaded 
equipment shall present a power factor on the 
worst phase not less than the limits specified 
in figure 8. 

NOTE: When the Air Force is the procur­
    ing activity, a copy of the power re­
    quirements data shall be submitted to 
    ihe Wright Air Deveiopmeni Center, 
    Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, 
    Ohio; Attention: WCLES. 

   6.9.5 Pluu!e fauure. One phase of three­
phase power can fail. Failure of one phase 
shall not result in an unsafe condition. During 
failure of the one phase, no equipment per­
fonnance is required unless specified in the 
equipment detail specification. 

  6.13,1 Sample form. The sample form for 
submittal of the power requirements data shall 
be as shown on figure 9. It shall be submitted 

(a) Cross out category of equipment not 
applicable. 
on 8 by 10¼ sheets. Instructions for complet­
ing the form shall be as follows: 
(c) Enter brackets at the top of the 
power requirements columns "M" 
for measured, "C" for calculated, 
or "R" for referenced, to indicate 
the source of information. Refer­
erence "R" can be detailed in the 
line "Source of Information" or 
under "REMARKS" as applicable. 
( 
d) Under "Operating Time" enter oper­
ating time for the corresponding 
mode. Strike out "(min)" or 
"(sec)" as applicable. Under "Spe-
(b) Fill in brackets to indicate mode or 
modes of equipment operation 
such as Warmup, Standby, Oper­
ate, · Low Power, Power Duty Cycle, Start, etc. Prepare sepa­
rate load requirements data for 
each mode of operation. 
cified" write the specified time for t1'e mnrlA nf nš?Jtf:tnn Ţing' 'M­
porteJ. 

(e) If the operation is cyclic, descn
l>e 
· 
the cycle under "Note." 

record of current versus time 
eharact
      .e..
       l"i
        _sties shall be pro
                       _sented 
as supplementary data. These 
data are not a requirement for 
loads rated less than 600 va or 20 
amperes de. 

(k) Description of any internal electri­
cal protective devices shall be 
listed under "REMARKS." 
(i) T
he power requirements shaii be 
measured in a line-to-neutral basis 
with the reference voltage and frequency applied to the termi­
nals of the equipment and entered in the appropriate spaces. Aţ 
measurements shall be effective 
values (rms) , with an accuracy of 
at least 1 percent. D-c measure­
ments should be aecu.i.
Ťte to ¾ 
of 1 percent. The angle entered 
under f.1!. shall be the angle be­
tween the corresponding line cur­
rent and the line A to neutral 
voltage. 
(g) When the current lags, the voltage, 
vars and PF shall be entered 
without sign ; when the current is 
leading, these items shall be boxed 
as indicated in the following ex­
ample: ť 
(I) Information may be included under 
"REMARKS" regarding substan­
tial improvement of utilization equipment performance, reliabil­
ity, weight, and size beyond speci­
fication requirements by mainŦ 
taining characteristics different 
than specified herein under sec­
tion 5. If possible, the degrees of 
improvement corresponding 
to 
changes of the given character­
istics should be listed. Note under 
"REMARKS" any unusual or uni­ que power conditions, data, or 
limits which will assist the appli­
cations engineer in determining 
the proper application of the 
equipment. 
Information, 
when 
known, should be included to indi­ cate maximum or minimum (or 
both) 
power source impedance 
limitations for satisfactory equip­
ment operation. 
7. NOTES 
(h) All power 
requirements entries 
shall be the steady-state demand 
for the mode of operation report­
ed. If unusual changes in power 
demand occur during a given 
mode of operation, description of 
the conditions and demands shall 
be made under ''REMARKS." 
(I) Power requirements for utilization 
equipment whose application will 
determine the input power shaii 
be based on full-load (nameplate) 
rating. Conditions of loading ver­
sus power demand shall be ex­
plained under ''REMARKS." Pow­
er requirements for intermittent 
duty equipment shall have the 
rated duty cycle descn
"bed under 
''REMARKS." 
(jj If the equipment has transient pow 
.. 
er requirements, an oscillographic 

  7.1 Normal electric-system operation. Nor­
mal · operation of the electric system are all 
functional electric-system operations requir­
ed for aircraft operation, aircraft mission 
. 
and electric-system controlled · continuity. 
These operations occur at any given instant 
and any n1unber of times during flight pŧ 
aration, takeoff, airborne conditions, landing, 
and anchoring. Examples of such operations 
are switching of utilization equipment loads, 
engine speed changes, bus switching and syn­
chronization, and paraiieiing oi eiectric power 
sources. 

SECUP
    ..!TY CL..
          A
          0S!F!CATION 

ELECTRIC POWER REQUIREMENTS FOR AIRCRAFT EQUIPMENT: 
                                                   _________ 
                                                                      _ 
______________________ SHEET _____ OF ____ 
                                                                       _ 
EQUIPMENT CATEGORY ("A") ("B") ("C") 

5 SECOND MAX POWER REQUIREMENTS FOR ( 

) imDE(S) OF OPERATION 

( 
) 
A (Ll 
( 
) 
P.F. 
( 
) 
Watts 
( 
) 
VA 
( 
) 
Vara 
( a. 
) 
I 
< 
, 
. V (L-N) 
l 
xxxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxx 
Operating Time I 
(min) (sec) 1 
Line 
Specified 
A 
B 
Note: 
C 

xxxxxxx xxxxxxx xxxxx 

REMARKS: 
          Inrush transient shown on supplementary data sheet No. ___
                                                        _________ 
                                                                         _ 

1 MINUTE MAX POWER REQUIREMENTS FOR ( 

) MODE(S) OF OPERATION 

) 
( 
) 
a. 
P.F. 
( 
) 
VA 
( 
) 
Watts 
( 
) 
Vara 
Operatinf Time 
( 
) 
( 
) 
( 
(min (sec) 
Line 
V (L-N) 
A (L) 
Specified 
A B 
' 

Note: 
                I TJ" lxxxxxxxl xxxxxx 1::::1 xxxxxx I xxxxx I xxxxx I xxxx 
REMARKS: 
              Inrush transient shown.on supplementary data sheet No, ____________ 
                                                                                                    _ 

15 MINUTE POWER REQUIREMENTS FOR ( 
                                                    ) MODE(S) OF OPERATION 

( 
) 
A 
(L) 
( 
) 
( 
) 
( 
) 
( 
) 'v..J 
ii 
P.F. 
VA 
Watts 
< 
> I 
V (L-N) 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxxx 
xxxxxxx 
Operating Time 
(min) (sec) 
Line 
Specified___ 
A 
B 
Nota: 
C 
Totals 

SOURCE OF INFORMATION _______________________ 
_ 
Unless otherwise stated herein, this equipment conforms to the requirements of Mll.r-STD-704. 

  7.2 Abnormal electric - system operation. 
Abnormal operation of the electric system is 
the unexpected but momentary loss of con­
trol of the electric system. The initiating 
action of the abnormal operation is uncon­
trolled and the exact moment of its occur­
rence is not nnticipated. However, recovery 
from thi.s operation is a . controlled action. 
This operation occurs perhaps once during a 
flight or·:as a result of battle damage or it 
may never occur during the life of an air­
craft. Art example of an abnormal operation 
is the faulting of electric power to the struc­
ture of an aircraft and its subsequent clear­
ing by fault protective devices. 

  7.3 Emergency electric -system operation. 
Emergency operation is defined as that con­
dition of the electric system during flight 
when the primary electric system becomes 
unable to supply sufficient or proper electric 
power, thus requiring the use of a limited 
independent alternate source of power. 

  7.4 Reference voltage. For the measure­
ment of input power and calibration of utili­
zation equipment. the following reference 
voltages shall be used: 
      (a) 115 volts line-to-neutral for the 
             115/200-volt a-c system. 
      (b) 28 volts line-to-ground for the 28-
             volt d-c system. 

  7.5 Reference frequency. For the meas­
urement of input power and calibration of 
utilization equipment. the reference fre­
quency of 400 cps shall be used. 

 and T - -
         1
          - Īt,, V,• t;. t 
     - - v.2 o 
 where: V, = 
           Variable bansient voltage 
             as a function of time, 
        t. = 
           Total time being cQnsidered 
             on a continuous basis, 
        V, = 
           Voltage at t,, which pro­
             vides an equivalent step 
             function of the transient 
             from zero to t., 
        T, = 
            Time at a value of V. being 
             considered which provides 
             an . equivalent step func­
             tion of the previous part 
             of the transient. 
       t;. T = 
            Arbitrary time increments 
             used to convert the tran­
             sient to a step function 
             loci, 
        V, = 
            Voltage at the start of the 
             t;. t increment. 
        V, = 
            Voltage at the end of the 
         · 
              t;. t increment. 
Zero time is the start of the transient and 
is considered to be the point in time when 
V, initially changes from one per unit. For 
all transients occurring in the normal mode 
of electric-system operation, the peak voltage 
or minimum voltage is reached very rapidly. 
Evaluation of these transients should reflect 
the minimum or maximum reached by con­
sidering the transient starting at the maxi­
mum or minimum voltage from time zero 
(start of transient) until its coinr ience of 
the actual transient. The coincidence is shown 
as point A in figure 10. Figure 10 is a sample 
conversion of an overvoltage transient to its 
evaluated step function loci. 

7.6 Conversion of a transient to its evaluated step function loci. On a basis of converting a complex voltage transient (V.) into a function of its reasonable equivalent runs on a continuous basis (f V. (rms) = V.), the basic formulas used for the conversion are:

$$\begin{array}{c}\mbox{V}_{\bullet}=\sqrt{\frac{1}{t_{\bullet}}\sum_{0}^{t_{\bullet}}\mbox{V}_{\bullet}{}^{2}\Delta t},\\ \mbox{V}_{\bullet}{}^{2}=\mbox{V}_{\bullet}{}^{2}\mbox{V}_{\bullet}{}^{2}.\end{array}$$

  7.6.1 Faalt transients. The conversion of 
a fault transient to its step function loci 
should be made on a continuous basis from 
time zero (initial time at start of the tran­
sient). Conformance to the requirement shall 
be indicated by the step function loci of the 
fault transient remaining wjthin the limits 
for abnormal mode of electric-system opera­
tion of figures 2 and 6. Additionally, confonn-

Check the source to verify that this is the current version before use.

L MIL-STD-704 POWER REQUIRED (AC) 2. Mllr-STD-704 POWER REQUmED (DC) 
8. OTHER 
TYPE 
POWER 
REQUIRED 
'- CATEGORY•A•EQUIPMENT 
6. CATEGORY"B• EQUIPMENT 6. CATEGORY "C• EQmPMENT 
7. DURING NORMAL OPERATION, REGIONS AND DEGREES OF 
DEGRADED PERFORMANCE ARE PEBMITTED 
8. DURING ABNORMAL OPERATION, REGIONS AND DEGREES OF 
PERFORMANCE ARE REQUIRED 
9. MANUAL RESET IS PERMITTED AFTER ABNORMAL OPERATION 
10. FULL EQUIPMENT PERFORMANCE IS REQUIRED FOR THE 
FOLLOWING AIRCRAFT OPERATING CONDffiONS: 
START AND WARMUP 
TAKEOFF AND CLIMB 
CRUISE AND CRUISE-COMBAT 
LANDING 
EMERGENCY 
12. EQUIPMENT PERFORMANCE IS REQUmED WITH LOSS OF 
POWER FROM ONE PHASE 
12. 
NOTES: 

checkoff list illastrated in figure 11 to specify 
considerations applicable to this 
                                         t,uidard. 
The notes detail the qualifying aspects for 
each item. 

ance should be obtained in that the actual 
fault voltaire should not exceed the minimum 
or· 
  maximum step function voltages specified 
in figures 2 and 6. 

## 7 .9 Assumptions.

· 7,9.1 **Smallut** *primary* electric ,rstem. The smallest primary electric system is 1,600 va ac, 
60 amps de. 

  7.7 Line drop compensation. Upon specific 
approval from the procuring activity, the 
categories "A" and "B" utilization equip­
ment may incorporate means to compensate 
for line drop. It is preferred that the means 
consist of taps brought out to the input pow­
er connection for selection at time of instal­
lation. 

  7 
    .9.2 Electric-system IJalan«. Balance in 
the electric system is within 16 percent, i.e., 
no lines are loaded so that the maximum va 
differential between lines is more than 16 per. 
cent of ½ the 3-phase va capacity. 

 7.8 Equipment detail specification. The 
equipment detail specification may use the 

  7 
   _9_R PrttJJM--R1
                 J-"t
                   .P:m.. .-nl:i'J'J.fl _ Pour 
                                     er a.ydJ)mɓ 
will be rated from discreet capacities such as 
1.5, 2.5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 60, 90, and 120 kva ac 
and 50, 100, 200, 300, and 400 amps de. 

  7.9.3 Genma,ti:ng-8'/!atem. ɏ
                              1ur.,.,,,,1.,,,.;__
                                         .t;,..,.ɐ Nn 
generating-system characteristic is considered 
unless it is usual and normal for the generat­
ing system to be tied to the bus at the time 
the characteristic becomes evident. 

  7.9.4 Electric-11Yatem c1w,racteri8tic8. Char­
acteristics covered in this standard are based 
on the electricɑystem power source being: 

Hydraulic 
             (constant speed drive) 
Air turbine ( 
             constant speed drive) 
l\iechanical ( 
             constant speed drive) 
Turboprop 
Inverters 
Transformer-rectifiers 
Batteries supported by generators 

  7.9.5 Normal wading. Normal loading of an 
electric system is between 15 percent and 85 
percent of the powerɒystem capacity and will 
be 30 to 85 percent for cruise-combat con­
ditions. 

  Notice. When Government drawings, specifications, 
or other data are ueed for any purpose other than in 
connection with a definitely related Government pro-­
curement operation, the United States Government 
thereby incurs no responsibility nor 8ny obligation 
urli 
   .. 
    t 
     .. 
     no.vor; and +'he .f'apf,_ t.lu:it H,e. r
                                   ..nv11>l"Tlm.Pl'lt. may 
have formulated, furnished. or in any w.ay supplied 
the said dra.wings, specifications, or other data is not 
t.o be regarded by implication or otherwise as in any 
manner licensing the holder or any other person or 
corporation, or conveying any· rights or permission 
to manufacture, use, or sell any patented invention 
that may in any way be related thereto. 
  Copies of specifi.cationa, standards, drawings, and 
publicationa required by contractors in connection 
with specific procurement functions should be ob­
tained from the piveuriug a....
                            --tivit"
                                 i or as dii'ected by 
the contracting officer. 
                                           :ɔ 
  Copi08 of this standard for military me ::may be 
obtained as indicated in the foreword to the Index 
of Military Specifications and Standards. 
  Copies of this atanda...
                      -d may be obtainro ɕOr other 
than otficial use by individuals, 1irms, and Contrac­
tors from the Superintendent of Document., U. S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington 25, D. C. 

  7.9.6 Initial ·warm.up. Initial warmup (first 
5 minutes) is not inclusive with takeoff, climb, 
cruise-combat, and landing aircraft opera­
tions. 

P,.,parin!! aeli•IIT• 
     NayY-Bareau ol Aeronautice 

7.9.7 System power factor. System power factor during cruise, and cruise-combat air­
craft operations will be more than 85 percent. 

Other caslodiam: 
Ann::r-Tramportalion Corp1 
Air Foree 