
## Military Specification

# Hose Assemblies, Rubber, Hydraulic High Pressure (3000 Psi)

This specification is approved for use by all Departments and Agencies of the Department of Defense. 

## 1. Scope

*1.1 Scope. This specification covers hose assemblies for use in hydraulic systems using,MIL-H-83282 hydraulic fluid. 

1.2 Classification. Hose assemblies shall be furnished in the sizes listed on MS28759, MS28762, MS2892Q, MS28921, MS28922, MS28923, and MS28924 as speci­
fied (see 6.2). 

## 2. Applicable Documents *2.1 Government Documents.

2.1.1 Specifications and Standards. 
                                     Unless otherwise specified, the 
following specifications and standards of the issue listed in that issue of 
the Department o.f Defense Index of Specifications and Standards (DoDISS) 
specified in the·solicitation form a part of this specification to the extent 
specified herein: 

SPECIFICATIONS 
FEDERAL 
Adhesive, Rubber Base, General Purpose 
MMM-A-1617 
MILITARY 
MIL-P-775 
MIL-C-5501 
MIL-H-5606 MIL-L-6082 
MIL-H-8788 
Hose, Hose Assemblies, Rubber, 
plastic, Fabric, or Metal (including 
Tubing), and Fittings, Nozzles and 
Strainers, Packing of 
Cap and Plug, Protective, Dust and 
Moisture Seal 
Hydraulic Fluid, Petroleum Base, 
Aircraft, Missile and Ordnance 
Lubricating Oil: 
Airt:raft 
Reciprocating (piston) Engine 
Hose, Hydraulic, High Pressure 

Beneficial comments (recommendations, additions, deletions) and any pertinent data which may be of use in improving this document should be addressed to: 
HQ AFLC CASO/LODS, Federal Center, Battle Creek MI 49016 by using the self­
addressed Standardization Document Improvement Proposal (DD Form 1426) 
annearin2 at the end of this document or by letter. 

MIL-F-8789 MIL-S-45180 
* 
MIL-H-83282 
Fitting End, Attachable Hydraulic, 
Pressure Hose 
Sealing Compound, Gasket, Hydrocarbon 
Fluid, Water Resistant 
Hydraulic Fluid, Fire Resistant 
Synthetic Hydrocarbon Base, Aircraft 

STANDARDS 
MILITARY 

MIL-STD-105 MIL-STD--129 
Ml.L-:STIJ-J.:>l 
MS28759 MS28762 
MS28920 
MS28921 MS28922 MS28923 
Rubber, Hydraulic (3000 
to Elbow 90 , Flared 
MS.28924 
Rubber, Hydraulic (3000 
to Elbow 90 , Flared 
Sampling Procedures and Tables for In­
spection by Attributes 
Marking for Shipment and Storage 
AGE Controls of Age-sensitive Elasto­
matic Material 
Hose Assembly, Hydraulic and Pneuma­
tic, (3000 psi)., Flared Tube 
Hose Assembly, Hydraulic and Pneumatic 
High Pressurğ- (3000 psi) Flareless Tube Hose Assembly, Rubber, Hydraulic (3000 
psi), Fitting End To Elbow 45 , Flared 
Tube 
Hose Assembly, Rubber, Hydraulic (3000 
psi), Fitting End To Elbow 90 , Flared 
Tube 
Hose Assembly, Rubber, Hydraulic (3000 
psi), Elbow 45 
to Elbow 45 , Flared 
Tube 
Hose Assembly, 
psi), Elbow 45 
Tube 
Hose Assembly, 
psi), Elbow 90 
Tube 

(Copies of specifications, standards, handbooks, drawings, and publications required by manufacturers in connection with specific acquisition functions should be obtained from the contracting.activity or as directed by the contracting officer,) 

*2.2 Other Publications •. The following document formsĠ part of this 
 specification to the extent specified herein, 
                                                The issues of the documents 
 which are inġicated as DoD adopted shall be the issue listed in the current 
 DoDISS and the supplement thereto, if appl_icable. 

(Application for copies of the above publication should be addressed to the 
Consolidated ClassificaĢion Committee, 202 Chicago Union Station, Chicago, 
Illinois 60606.) 

*2.3 Order of Precedence. 
In the event of a·ccnflict betwee..ģ the text of 
this specification and the references cited herein, the text of this ·speci­
fication shall **take** precedence. 

## 3. Requirements

3.1 General. The hose assemblies furnished under this-specifications shall 
consist of hose conforming to MIL-H-8788 and end fittings conforming to 
MIL-F-8789, which when assembled, meet the quality assurance provisions of 
section 4 herein. 
                   Prior to assembly, MMM-A-1617 or MIL-S-45180A type II 
sealant shall be applied to each end of the MIL-H-8788 hose. 
                                                             The sealant 
shall provide a moisture seal for the exposed wire braid and shall not be 
harmful to the hose or fitting material. 

3.1.1 Loosening or changing end fitting position. After the end fittings 
have been installed on the hose, there shall be no loosening or changing 
of an end fitting position on the hose. 

3.2 Data. Unless otherwise specified in the contract or order, no data are 
required by this specification or any of the documents referenced in section 
2 herein (see 6.2). 

3. 3 Length. Hose assemblies shall be made only to the length increments 
specified on MS28759, MS28762, MS28920, MS28921, MS28922, MS28923, and 
MS28924. 

3.4 Orientation angle of bent tube couplings. When hose assemblies in 
accordance with MS28922, MS28923, or MS28924 are required, the orientation 
angle shall be as specified (see 6.2). 

*3.5 Performance. Hose assemblies shall satisify the performance requirements 
specified in Table I and Section 4, when subjected to the following tests: 

a. 
b. 
c. d. 
e. 
Hydraulic proof pressure•-----------------(4.6.1) 
Coupling------------
--------·---
(4 .6.2) 
Leakage-----------
------(4.6.3) 
Burst pressure--
--------
----(4.6.4) 
Hydraulic impulse test-
----------(4.6.5) 
Hose 
Size 
No. 
Proof 
Burst 
Operating 
Bend 
Assembly Length in Ac-
Pressure 
Pressure 
Pressure 
Radius ·cordance with MS28759, 
psi 
psi. 
psi 
Inside MS28762, and MS28920 
(min) 
(min) 
Inches 
through MS28924 
(min) 
,• 
4 
5 
6 
8 
10 
12 
16 
8,000 
16,000 
3,000 
3 
16 
7,000 
14,000 
3,000 
3 3/8 
18 
7,000 
14,000 
3,000 
5 
21 
7,000 
14,000 
3,000 
5 3/4 
24 
6,000 
12,000 
3,000 
6 1/2 
30 
'6,000 
12,000 
3,000 
7 3/4 
33 
5,000 
10,000 
3,000 
9 5/8 
24 

*3.6 Identification of product. Each hose assembly shall be identified with a 
 durable permanently attached tag. 
                                   Thia tag shall show the MS number, date of 
 assembly, and manufacturer's name or trademark. 

3.7 Age control. 

Hose assemblies shall meet the age limitation requirements specified in MIL-STD-1523. 

3.8 End fitting nut thread class. 

After pressure testing Class 2B threads are acceptable on end fitting nuts. 

*3.9 Workmanship, 
Workmanship shall be of the quality necessary to produce 
hose assemblies free from ell defects that will affect proper functioning in 
service. Assemblies must be clean and dry in accordance with MIL-P-775. 

## 4. Quality Assurance Provisions

*4. 1 Responsibility for inspections. 
Unless otherwise specified in the contract 
or purchase order, the contractor is responsible for the performance of all 
inspection requirements as specified herein, 
Except as otherwise specified 
in the contract or purchase.order, the contractor may use his own or any 
other. facilities suitable for the performance of the inspection requirements 
specified herein, unless disapproved by the Government, 
The Government 
reserves the right to perform any of the inspection set forth in the speci­
fication where sƕch inspections are deemed necessary to assure supplies 
and services conform to prescribed requirements. 
*4. 2 Classifications of inspections. 
The inspection requirements specified 
herein are classified as follows: 
a. 
Qualification inspection (see 4. 3) 
b. 
Quality conformance inspection (see 4.4) 
*4. 3 Qualification inspection. 
Sampling test shall be conducted in con­
formance with MIL-STD-105. 
Any hose assembly failing to meet the require­
ments of the routine test (4.3 and 4. 3) shall be caused for rejecting the 
lot represented, 
Before a lot or part of a lot that has been previously 
rejected by the procuring agency - .  
(Government or Commercial) csn be 
submitted for test, full particulars concerning the cause of previous 
reject shall be submitted by the contractor. 
*4. 4 Quality conformance inspection. 
The quality conformance test shall 
consist of: 
a. 
Examinations-,------
---( 
4. 4 
, 
1) 
b. 
Individual Test------------(4. 4,2) 
c. 
Sampling Test----------(4,4. 3) 
d. 
Hydraulic Impulse Test-------(4.4. 4) 

## 4. 4.1 Examinations

4. 4,1. 1 Examination of product, Each hose assembly shall be carefully examined visually to determine conformance to this specification with respect to materials, workmanship, and l)larking, and conformance to the applicable standards. 

4.4.2 Individual tests, Each hose assembly submitted for acceptance under contract shall be subjected to the following tests, as specified under 4.6. 

a. 
Hydraulic proof pressure-----(4.6. 1) 
b. 
CouplingƖ-----------------(4. 6.2) 
4.4. 3 Sampling tests. 

Eight hose assemblies individually selected at random from each 10,000 hose assemblies or less, of each size submitted under con­
tract, shall be subjected, in order, to the following tests as specified un­
der 4. 5. These test assemblies shall not be delivered as part of the contract. 

a. 
Leakage---------------------------------------(4. 6.3) 
b. 
Burst pressure---------------------------------(4. 6.4) 
4.4. 4 Hydraulic impulse test. 

Five hose assemblies shall be individually selected at random from each 10,000 hose assemblies (or fraction thereof) , for each dash size. 

They shall be subjected to the hydraulic impulse test 
(4. 6.5) and shall not be delivered as part of the contract. 

4.4. 5 Examination of preparation for delivery. 

An examination shall be made to determine that packaging, packing, and marking comply with the requirements of section 5 of this specification. 

## 4. 5 Test Conditions.

*4. 5. 1 Test fluid. 
Unless otherwise specified, the test fluid shall be 
lubricating oil conforming to grade 1100 of MIL-L-6082 or hydraulic fluid 
conforming to MIL-H-5606 or MIL-H-83282 or water. 
Hoses must be cleaned and 
dried after test. 

## 4. 6 Test Methods.

4. 6.1 Hydraulic proof pressure. 

The test shall be made by applying the pressure not less than 30 seconds nor more than 5 minutes. 

Each assembly shall be subjected to the hydraulic proof pressure of Table I without indication of failure or leakage. 

4.6,2 Coupling, The bulging of hose innƗr tubes caused by the attachment of the end fittings shall be measured by means of a ball-end type gage as specified in the coupling test of section 4 of MIL-H-8788. 

Bulg diameter of the inner tube smaller than the minimum allowed in Figure 1 shall be cause for rejection. 

*4. 6. 3 Leakage. 
This test shall be made on two unaged samples, 
Hydraulic 
fluid conforming to MIL-H-5.606 or MIL-H-83282 or water shall be used, and 
the pressure shall be accomplished on leakage specimens as follows. 
Seventy 
percent of the minimum burst value shown in Table I shall be obtained and 
held for 5 minutes, then reduced to zero, after which the pressure shall be 
raised to 70 percent of the minimum burst pressure for a final 5 minute 
check. 
The adjacent outer cover shall be carefully checked during this period 
for any wicking or leakage of the test fluid which might indicate leakage of 
the hose. 
There shall be no direct leakage from the end fitting, and no 
seepage back through the fabric which might produce separation or swelling of 
the hose.· A written record shall be kept of leakage and-of the additional 
tightening which might be necessary to stop ali leakage at the end fitting if 
the threaded type of end fittings is used, 
After· completion of the leakage 
test on these samples, they shall be subjected to the burst pressure test 
specified in 4,5. 4. 
The assemblies shall be a minimum of 12 inches in length, 

*4.6.4 Burst pressure. 
                        Two unaged assemblies shall be subjected to the 
hydraulic burst pressure specified in Table I within 24 hours after assembly 
of the end fittings to the hose. The tests shall be made with hydraulic 
fluid conforming to MIL-H-5606 or MIL-H-83282 or water. The rate of 
pressure rise shall be 25,000 + 0, -10,000 psi per minute. Pressure shall 
be applied until failure occurs. Below the burst pressure, the end fittings 
shall not blow off or loosen, and there shall be no external leakage from 
 the hose or end fittings. During this test, the hose assembly shall be 
fastened at one end to the source of pressure, the hose shall be extended 
straight, and the free end shall not be restrained or fastened in any way. 
The actual pressure at which the samples burst or otherwise fail shall be 
recorded. The assemblies shall be a minimum of 12 inches in length. 

*4.6.5 Hydraulic impulse test. 
                                The hydraulic impulse samples shall be of 
lengths specified in Table I. 
                                They shall be subject to the applicable proof 
pressure specified in Table I, prior to pulsing. 
                                                   The assemblies shall then 
 be connected to manifolds installed in a testing machine which will produce 
 dynamic pressure impulses in the inlet manifold of the magnitudes and fre­
 quency ahowu in Figure 2. 
                            Electronic measuring devices shall be used to 
 measure and indicate the impulse pressures. The -16 size only shall be 
 tested without surge peaks and in a straight position; one end may be 
 free. 
        The test fluid shall conform to MIL-H-5606 or MIL-H-83282, except 
 that up to 25 percent of MIL-L-6082 oil may be added to the test .fluid 
 and shall be held at a· temperature of 120 + 2rf F measured in the manifold. 
Leakage, burst or coupling blowoff shall be-evidence of failure. · The 
 minimum impulse cycles shall be specified in Table II. 

Minimum 
Minimum Average 
Maximum Impulse .Cycles 
Size 
Impulse 
Impulse Cycles 
that can be used to 
Cycles 
(1) 
compute average (2) 
4 
100,000 
5 
100,000 
6 
100,000 
8 
75,000 
100,000 
150,000 
10 
50,000 
75,000 
100,000 
12 
35,000 
50,000 
70,000 
16 
45,000 
55,000 
75,000 

  (1) Average of four test assemblies. 
  (2) When test assemblies impulse cycles are averaged, the maximum cycles 
that can be used to compute the average shall not exceed the figures given 
in this column. 

## *5. Packaging

•s:1 Preservation, packaging and packing. 
Preservation, packaging and 
packing of the hose assemblies shall be in accordance with MIL-P-775. 
Both 
ends of each hose assembly shall be sealed with plugs conforming to 
MIL-C-5501. 
5.2 Levels. 

The levels of preservation and packaging shall be level A or C 
and the levels of packing shall be A, ·B or C as specified. 

5.3 Marking of shipments. 
                            Interior packages and exterior shipping containers 
shall be marked in accordance with MIL-SĜl29. 
                                                  The identification shall 
include the hose cure date. 

## 6. Notes

6. 1 Intended use. 

The hose assemblies are intended for use in hydraulic systems when used in accordance with the applicable assembly standard and st operating pressures not to exceed 3000 psi. 

6, 2 Ordering data. Procurement documents should specify: 

(a) Title, number, and date of this specification. 
(b) Size and length of hose assemblies to be furnished in accordance with the applicable hose assembly standard (see 1. 2) . 

(c) Bent tube orientation angles. 
(d) Data requirements (see 3. 2) , 
(e) Applicable levels of preservation and packaging, and packing (see 
5. 2. 

*6. 3 Qualification. 

With respect to products requiring qualification, awards will be made only for products which are at the time set for opening of bids, qualified for inclusion in the applicable Qualified Products List whether or not such products have actually been so listed by that date. 

The attention of the contractors is called to these requirements, and"manufacturers are urged to arrange to have the products that they propose to offer to the Federal Government tested for qualification in order that they may be eligible to be awarded contracts or orders for the products covered by this specification. 

The activity responsible for the Qualified Products List is San Antonio ALC/MMIRCC, Kelly AFB, Texas 78241, and information pertaining to qualificaƘ 
tion of product may be obtained from that activity. 

This specificatioƙ superseded MIL-H-5512 for hose formerly covered under MIL-H-5512 will be procured fittings may be procured under MIL-F-8789. 

6.4 Superseding data. 

assemblies. 

Bulk hose under MIL-H-8788. 

End 
6. 5 Changes from previous issue. 

The margins of this specification are marked with an asterisk to indicate where changes (additions, modifications, corrections, deletions) from the previous issue are made, This was done as a convenience only and the.Government assumes no liability whatsoever for any inaccuracies in these notations, Bidders and contractors are cautioned to evaluate the requirements of this document based on the entire content irrespective of the marginal notations and relationship to the last previous issue, Preparing Activity: 
· Air Force - 99 
Custodians: 
Air Force - 99 
Army - ME 
Navy - AS 
Project 4720-0398 
Review Activities: 
Army - MI, AV 
DLA - CS 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
Thi• aheel i■ 10 be filled out by personnel, either Govemment or contractor, involve_d in the use of the 11pecific■tion in procurement of product• **(qr** ultim■le u11e by the Department of **Dden■**e. 

Th•• ■heet is provided for obtaining information on the use of this epecirication which will in■ure that suitable product■ 
can be procured with - minimum amount of delay and at the lea1u coat. 

Comment■ and the retum of 1hi11 form will be appreciated. Fold on lines on reverse side, staple in comer, and ■end to preparing activity. Comments and suglil:e■tion• submitted on this form do not constitute or imply authorization to waive any portion of thr referenced documc,:.t(s) or serve to amend con.trectu&I requirem.rite. 

## I. Has Any Part Of The Specification Created Problems Or Required Interpretation In Procure­ B. Recommendations Foiiii Correcting T'"'E Oef'Iciencies L. Is The Specification Restrictive'

DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE 
OFFICIAL BUSINESS 
PENALTY FOR PRIVATE use S300. 

## Business Rl;Ply Mail

FIRS"T CLASS 
PERMIT NO, 73238 
WASHINGTON D. C. 

## Postage Will Be Paid By The **Department** Of The Air Force

HQ AFLC CASO/LODS 
Federal Center Battle Creek MI 49016 