
## Automatic Direction Finding Equipment Performance

2.0 
11 
REQUIREMENTS AND TEST PROCEDURES 
.cccccccsccccevccseveces 
1] 
General 
Requirements 
eneeaeeseeoeoseeoneeeoeeneneaeseeaeseeeseneeeeen ead 
2.1 
11 
Airworthiness 
... 
eoeoeseovpeasees @eseeevoevetepsceaoeaeoeseeeeoeee#e 
ee see @ 
11 
11 
11 11 
11 
11 
Intended Function .evvecevccccccscscsevecccseevere 
Federal Communications Commission Rules 
...esesece 
Fire Protection wecccccccccccsesevesessesevevecens 
Operation Of Controls 
..cceeeeecsecccvcrescvcccece 
Accessibility of Controls 
wsecccccvscccvsccesvcees 
Effects 
Of Test 
cecccccccccsvcssccscccceresneccees 
12 
Equipment Performance 
- Standard Conditions 
....seseseeees 
2.2 
12 
12 
12 
13 
13 
13 
13 
Tuning RESOLULION 
.eeveecececccesvevscscenssssevecs 
Ground Station Interoperability ....ccccccsecccces 
Sensitivity (MCW Receiver Function) 
..cceccesvecee 
Sensitivity (CW Receiver Function) 
...scseceoeccees 
Bearing Accuracy (ADF Function) 
...cscccccccvecees 
Station Passage (ADF Function) 
...ccececccccccscecs 
Audio Frequency ReESpOnsSe sevesecserccccsseccvvcens 
Audio Output Level Variation With Load 
e 
NN 
HMM ND 
bd 
hs 
s..)6UC 
e 
NN 
NM MN 
NH 
bh 
bo 
e 
e 
COnNOAUE 
WH 
13 
Impedance 
eevee 
uevuevneveseceoeoe 
vee eoeeenesvpeeeeewe 
eevee 
eeneve 
ve 
14 
14 
eoe@eeeeeoeeeesves 
Nh 
Nh 
PD 
NI 
DN 
bh 
DiStOrtion 
cocccccccsccvcncsaces 
AGC Characteristics 
.woccscsseeee 
Receiver Selectivity (MCW Receiver 
Function) 
.cccccccececs 
Receiver Selectivity (ADF Function) 
...sseeceseces 
14 
14 
15 
Spurious Response 
....eeee- cece cece screens 
bh et 
1O 
me 
© 
ho 
is) 
* 
e 
Cross 
Modulation 
@eeeecovueeeeneeeeeeveeeseeevoevnvneeeaenee 
eee 
6 
15 
16 
Tntermodulation 
~eesevo@aseveevsee 
Cee eseseeevoeveeovoeseseseee ese 
9 
@ 
Direction Finder Operation with Beat 
Ww 
fo) 
e 
* 
a 
& 
NO BN 
NS 
BO 
NO 
e 
No 
BNO NO 
NO 
dO 
16 
Frequency Oscillator wecseccecesvcvvvececscsccns 
Equipment Performance 
~- Environmental 
2.3 
17 
@eeeteee#*es¢@eseeseeesee 
eeseteeeseoeseew@evee7evpeeeseseee 
oe @ 
0 
@ 
Conditions 
Temperature and Altitude Tests 
...ccsscccccvecvecs 
Temperature Variation Test 
..cscccscsvcesvessecoes 
Humidity 
Test 
eseeveveecseeeveeeneeeeeoesvpeeoeaneveeoeeeeaseee 
eee 
Shock 
Tests 
@eeoovce@eeeteoeseeoev Boson 
es 
@eseeeoeaeneen 
Vibration 
Tests 
eseesvpeevaevovpeveveveeeeeeveeseveeeveveeensn ee 
@ 
Explosion 
Test 
eeeo4eeuveeeoeosseeeaueaeseoevevevaeevm ev 
eee 
eve 
ef 
eeaesvvoeveveepeeveeveeaeveweeeeeeeneene 
eases 
Waterproofness Test 
° 
17 
19 
19 
19 
20 
20 
20 21 
Fluids Susceptibility Tests 
..cssccccscsveccoes 
eaenentovneaeveveweneeneeen 
eee ane ee 
Sand and Dust Test 
.eceee 
Fungus 
Resistance 
Test 
eaeoe@enueceeavseee# 
ees 
seeeasneesev 
eee 
@ 
Salt 
Spray 
Test 
eevovs,eeveveneeasepevvevovevoevvneesee 
eee 
eee 
ese 
21 
22 
22 
22 
Magnetic Effect Test 
...seceseeens 
eeeoeaeeees ee 
e 
mre eo 
on 
nau 
& 
& be 
w 
WD 
WW 
W 
b 
LO 
WwW 
WD 
WwW 
Wo 
WD 
ON MD 
DH NNN 
DM 
NH 
LH 
ND 
e 
tom 
© 

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 
--`,`,,``,```,,,`````````,``,`,,-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
document in whole, or in part, is the sole reponsibility of appropriate governmental agencies. 

Since the measured values of equipment performance 
. 

characteristics may be a function of the method of measurement, standard test conditions and methods of test are recommended in this document. 

This document considers a configuration of airborne receiving equipment including: 
Antenna system(s), transmission lines, radio receiver, receiver control unit and a bearing indication display. 

Additional functions and components that refer to expanded capabilities are identified as optional features. 

Features that are beyond the scope of this document may be developed in future RTCA activities. 

The word "system" 
as used in this document refers to the NDB/ADF system. 

It includes all portions of both the NDB 
ground transmitter and the ADF equipment. 

The word "equipment" 
as used in this document includes all components necessary for the equipment to properly perform its intended function. 

For example, ADF receiving 
"equipment" may include an antenna, a receiver unit, a control unit, a bearing indicator, a shock mount, etc. 

In the case of this example, all of the foregoing components or units comprise the "equipment." 
It should not be inferred from this example, however, that every receiving equipment will necessarily include all of the foregoing components. 

This will depend on the design used by the equipment manufacturer. 

## 1.2 System Overview 1.2.1 Basic System Description

The NDB/ADF system consists of airborne direction finders 
(ADF) 
and ground stations called nondirectional beacons 
(NDB). 

The ADF senses and automatically indicates the direction of arrival of the NDB signal. 

Direction is indicated to the pilot as a magnetic bearing or as a relative bearing to the longitudinal axis of the aircraft, depending on the type of indicator installed in the aircraft. 

The equipment may be used to monitor MCW or CW transmissions. 

A typical example of this operation is the reception of the NDB station identifier. 

The NDB 
is a ground station transmitting omni-directional signals. 

When the NDB 
is operational, it transmits a station identifier using either MCW or CW modulation. 

When the NDB 
is installed as a part of the instrument landing system 
(ILS), it is normally called a compass locator. 

sources of interfering signals, and combinations of interfering signals, under all conditions. 

The relative signal levels that are specified in Section 2.0 realistically represent conditions that will be encountered. 

However, they may be exceeded in small volumes of airspace. 

When the conditions specified in Section 2.0 are exceeded, the aural identification will be garbled and there is a high probability that the source of the interference will not be 
90 degrees from the desired station. 

Thus, the probability is high that the bearing information provided may be within the accuracy specified. 

In any event, the garbled identification signal provides a warning that the bearing information should not be used. 

## Spurious Response, Cross Modulation And Intermodulation 1.4.3

Equipment spurious responses, cross modulation effects or intermodulation effects should not inhibit the pilot from receiving the NDB within the NDB coverage volume 
(see paragraphs 
2.2.13, 
2.2.14 and 2.2.15). 

## Bearing Accuracy 1.4.4

The basic purpose of an NDB 
is to allow a pilot to fly from one point to another and to stay within a given volume of airspace in the process. 

In designing procedures which use an NDB, the designer ensures obstacle clearance in the protected airspace, Total system accuracy then should permit a pilot to stay within this airspace. 

A portion of the total bearing accuracy error budget is allocated to the avionics. 

The avionics should be capable of meeting this bearing accuracy even if antenna impedances are changed, as might occur during in-flight icing conditions, or if the receiver is slightly detuned, as might occur during in-flight temperature changes. 

The equipment should provide a means for quadrantal error correction. 

## Assumptions

1.5 
The following assumptions were used in preparing this MOPS. 

## 1.5.1 Field Strength

A 
50 microvolts per meter signal is the minimum field strength at the coverage limits in the U.S. 

(70 microvolts per meter minus 
3 dB allowable degradation in beacon transmitter power). 

A receiver sensitivity which provides a 
3 dB signal-plusnoise to noise ratio is acceptable at 
50 microvolts per meter. 

Measurement methods are more accurate with a 
6 
dB signal-plusnoise to noise ratio. 

Therefore, system performance is established with a 
70 microvolts per meter field strength corresponding to a 
6 
dB signal-plus-noise to noise ratio. 

For a definition of rated coverage of NDBs under various noise conditions in other areas of the world, see paragraph 
6.3.3, Attachment C 
to Part 
1 
of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) publication, "Aeronautical Telecommunications Annex 
10, Third Edition of Volume I, July, 
1972." 

## 1.5.2 Selectivity

The selectivities in paragraphs 
2.2.11 
and 2.2.12 assume that a 
10 dB minimum desired/undesired signal ratio at the input to the detector will provide no more than 
3 degrees bearing error. 

(Reference: 
The Technique of Radio Design by E. 

E. 

Zepler) 

## 1.5.3 Warnings And Flags

Unlike some other navigational aids, the NDB/ADF system does not require a warning or a flag if the received signal is deficient in level or quality. 

The pilot must determine whether the received signal is reliable by listening to the identification and observing the needle movements. 

The reception of two identification signals or the lack of any identification means that the ADF bearing may be unreliable. 

Similarly, unusual needle variations are also an indication of unreliable bearing. 

If the NDB/ADF system does not provide a warning or flag, the pilot should monitor identification and needle variation while making use of the ADF bearing. 

## 1.6 Test Procedures

The test procedures and associated limits specified throughout this document are intended to be used as one means of demonstrating compliance with the minimum acceptable performance parameters. 

Although specific test procedures are cited, it is recognized that other methods may be preferred by the test activity. 

These alternate procedures may be used if they provide at least equivalent information. 

In such cases, the procedures cited herein should be used as one criterion in evaluating the acceptability of the alternate procedures. 

Test results may be used to demonstrate functional performance in the environment in which the equipment is intended to operate, In addition, the ground test procedures may be used as an optional check of equipment performance following corrective maintenance. 

1.6.4 

## Operational Tests

The operational tests are specified in Section 4.0. 

These test procedures and their associated limits are intended to be conducted by operating personnel as one means of ensuring that the equipment is functioning properly and can be reliably used for its intended function. 

## Definitions Of Terms

1.7 

Automatic Direction Finder Function 
- An operational mode 
in 
which navigation information 
is presented on 
a bearing display 
that 
is automatically controlled 
to indicate 
the direction of 
arrival 
of radio waves. 
In addition, 
the identification of 
the 

NDB ground station is audible to the pilot. 

CW Receiver Function 
- An operational mode 
in which 
the output 

is an audio signal derived from the on and off keying of the ground station. 

Simultaneous bearing information to indicate the direction of arrival of the radio waves may be presented on a bearing display.: 

MCW Receiver Function 
- An operational mode 
in which received 
amplitude modulated 
or equivalent signals provide 
an audio 
output signal. 
Quadrantal Error 
-— Angular error of 
a measured bearing caused 
by disturbances 
due 
to the characteristics 
of 
the airframe. 
Rated Audio Output Power 
- The manufacturer's maximum specified 
audio output power that 
is obtained with 
a standard input 
signal with 
a field strength of 
1000 microvolts 
per meter. 

Signal-Plus-Noise to Noise Ratio 
(CW) 
- This ratio shall be determined with the receiver beat frequency oscillator "ON," 
and with the carrier "ON" 
and "OFF," 
for "SIGNAL 
+ NOISE" 
and 
"NOISE," respectively. 

Signal-Plus-Noise to Noise Ratio 
(MCW) 
- This ratio shall be determined with the carrier "ON" and the modulation "ON" 
and 
"OFF", for "SIGNAL 
+ NOISE" 
and "NOISE," respectively. 

Standard Input Signal 
- Unless otherwise specified, the RF 
signal shall be modulated 
30% 
at 
400 Hz. 

## 2.2.4 Sensitivity (Cw) - (Cw Receiver Function)

The level of an unmodulated RF input signal required to produce reference output with a signai-plus-noise to noise ratio of 
6 
dB shall not exceed 
70 microvolts per meter. 

NOTE: 
This standard is applicable only to receivers equipped with a beat frequency oscillator (BFO) 
or equivalent means to identify keyed CW signals. 

## 2.2.5 Bearing Accuracy - (Adf Function)

At all bearing positions of the loop assembly, the indicated bearing shall not differ from the direction of arrival of the radio signal to which the equipment is tuned by more than three degrees for tuned frequencies below 850 kHz and eight degrees for frequencies above 
850 kHz. 

This requirement shall apply when the input signal field strength is varied between 
70 microvolts per meter and 0.2 volt per meter. 

For equipment including a fixed amount of quandrantal error compensation, the indicated bearing shall be corrected by the amount of quandrantal error compensation so included. 

For equipment including an error compensating device which is adjustable, this device may be set prior to testing the equipment so as to obtain a minimum bearing error. 

However, no adjustment of this device shall be made during conduct of the test. 

'This requirement shall be met using both unmodulated signals and signals modulated up to a depth of 80% from 400 
to 1000 Hz. 

## 2.2.6 Station Passage - (Adf Function)

When the direction of arrival of a signal is abruptly changed through 
175 degrees, the bearing indicator shall indicate a corresponding 170-degree change in less than seven seconds. 

## 2.2.7 Audio Frequency Response

With a constant field strength of 
1000 microvolts per meter modulated 
30% and with the receiver gain adjusted to produce 
30% 
of rated power output into a resistive load equal to the design load impedance, the audio output level shall not vary more than 
6 dB from a 
700 Hz reference level over the audio frequency range of 
350 Hz to 
1100 Hz. 

## 2.2.8 Audio Output Level Variation With Load Impedance

The change in level of the output signal shall not exceed 
3 dB 
and the distortion in the output signal shall not exceed 
10%, when the output load impedance for which the receiver is from, and exceeds in field strength, that of the desired signal in the following amounts: 

| Frequency    | Difference    | Minimum    | Field    |   Strength  | Ratio    |
|--------------|---------------|------------|----------|-------------|----------|
| +1           | kHz           | -10        | dB       |             |          |
| +1.5         |               |            |          |             |          |
| kHz          |               |            |          |             |          |
| -            |               |            |          |             |          |
| 4            |               |            |          |             |          |
| dB           |               |            |          |             |          |
| +2           | kHz           | 2          | dB       |             |          |
| +3           | kHz           | 17         | dB       |             |          |
| +4           | kHz           | 32         | dB       |             |          |
| +5           | kHz           | 47         | dB       |             |          |
| +6           | kHz           | 62         | dB       |             |          |
| +7           | kHz           | greater    | than     |         70  | dB       |

## Spurious Response 2.2.13

All spurious responses from 
50 kHz to 
150 MHz, excluding the band from 
10 kHz above to 
10 kHz below the tuned frequency, shall be down at least: 

a. 
80 
dB when 
the receiver 
is 
tuned anywhere 
in the 
frequency range of 
190-850 kHz. 
b. 
60 
dB when 
the receiver 
is 
tuned above 
850 kHz. 

## Cross Modulation 2.2.14

With the simultaneous application of a 
30%, 
400 Hz modulated undesired signal not less than 
10 
kHz removed from the tuned frequency, and an unmodulated desired signal at the channel frequency as shown below, the aural output produced by the undesired signal should not exceed 
90% 
of rated audio output power when the audio gain control is adjusted to produce rated audio output power when the desired signal is at 
1000 microvolts per meter modulated 
30% at 400 Hz. 

a. 
The desired RF signal 
is 
at any level between 
100 microvolts per meter and 0.2 volt per meter. 
b. 
The undesired RF signal 
is: 
(1) 
At any level between 
100 microvolts per meter and 
1.0 volt per meter 
for signals between 550 kHz and 
150 MHz. 
(2) 
At any level between 
100 microvolts 
per meter and 
0.2 volt per meter 
for signals between 
50 and 
550 kHz, 
except those signals which 
fall within the 
band 
10 kHz above and below the frequency 
to which 
the receiver 
is tuned. 

## 2.3 Equipment Performance - Environmental Conditions

The environmental tests and performance requirements described in this subsection are intended to provide a laboratory means of determining the equipment's overall performance characteristics under conditions representative of those which may be encountered in actual operations. 

Some of the environmental tests contained in this subsection do not have to be performed unless the manufacturer wishes to qualify the equipment for that particular environmental condition. 

These tests are identified by the phrase "When Required." 
If the manufacturer wishes to qualify the equipment to these additional environmental conditions, then these 
"When Required" tests shall be performed. 

Unless otherwise specified, the test procedures applicable to a determination of equipment performance under environmental test conditions are contained in RTCA Document DO-160A, 
"Environmental Conditions and Test Procedures for Airborne Equipment," dated January 1980. 

Some of the performance requirements in Subsections 
2.1 
and 
2.2 are not required to be tested to all of the conditions contained in RTCA/DO-160A. 

Judgment and experience have indicated that these particular performance parameters are not susceptible to certain environmental conditions and that the level of performance specified in Subsections 
2.1 and 
2.2 
will not be measurably degraded by exposure to these particular environmental conditions. 

## 2.3.1 Temperature And Altitude Tests (Do-160A, Section 4.0)

RTCA/DO-160A contains several temperature and altitude test procedures which are specified according to the category for which the equipment will be used. 

These categories are included in paragraph 4.2 of DO-160A. 

The following subparagraphs contain the applicable test conditions specified in Section 4.0 of DO-160A. 

## 2.3.1.1 Low Temperature Test

--`,`,,``,```,,,`````````,``,`,,-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
The equipment shall be subjected to the test conditions as specified in RTCA/DO-160A, paragraph 4.4, and the following requirements of this standard shall be met: 

a. 
Paragraph 2.2.3 
- Sensitivity (MCW) 
b. 
Paragraph 2.2.4 
- Sensitivity (CW) 
c. 
Paragraph 2.2.5 
- Bearing Accuracy 
d. 
Paragraph 2.2.11 
- Receiver Selectivity 
~ 
(MCW Receiver 
Function) 

## High Temperature Test 2.3.1.2

The equipment shall be subjected to the test conditions as specified in RTCA/DO-160A, paragraph 4.5, and the following requirements of this standard shall be met: 

| a.    | Paragraph    | 2.2.3    | -    | Sensitivity    | (MCW)    |
|-------|--------------|----------|------|----------------|----------|
| b.    | Paragraph    | 2.2.4    | -    | Sensitivity    | (CW)     |

ce. 
Paragraph 2.2.5 
- Bearing Accuracy 
d. 
Paragraph 2.2.11 
- Receiver Selectivity 
- 
(MCW Receiver 
Function) 
Altitude Tests 

## 2.3.1.3

The equipment shall be subjected to the test conditions as specified in RTCA/DO-160A, paragraph 4.6, and the following requirements of this standard shall be met: 

a. During the test: 

Paragraph 2.2.5 
- Bearing Accuracy 
(At 
0 degrees 
and one 
frequency) 
b. Following the test: 
(1) Paragraph 2.2.3 
- Sensitivity (MCW) 
(2) Paragraph 2.2.4 
- Sensitivity (CW) 
(3) Paragraph 2.2.5 
- Bearing Accuracy 

## Decompression Test -— (When Required)

2.3.1.4 

The equipment shall be subjected to the test conditions as specified in RTCA/DO-160A, paragraph 4.6.2, and the following requirements of this standard shall be met: 

a. During the test: 

Paragraph 2.2.5 
- Bearing Accuracy 
(At 
0 degrees 
and one 
frequency) 
b. Following the test: 
(1) Paragraph 2.2.3 
- Sensitivity (MCW) 
(2) Paragraph 2.2.4 
- Sensitivity (CW) 
(3) Paragraph 2.2.5 
- Bearing Accuracy 

## Overpressure Test - (When Required) 2.3.1.5

The equipment shall be subjected to the test conditions as specified in RTCA/DO-160A, paragraph 4.6.3, and the following requirements of this standard shall be met: 

## Fluids Susceptibility Tests (Do-160A, Section 11.0)

2.3.8 
The following subparagraphs contain the applicable test conditions specified in Section 11.0 of DO-160A. 

## Spray Test (When Required) 2.3.8.1

The equipment shall be. subjected to the test conditions as specified in RTCA/DO-160A, paragraph 
11.2.1, and the following requirements of this standard shall apply: 

a. 
At 
the end of 
the 24-hour exposure period, 
the equipment 
shall operate at 
a level of performance which indicates 
that no significant failures 
of components 
or circuitry 
have occurred. 
b. 
Following the two-hour operational period at ambient 
temperature, 
after the 
160-hour exposure period at elevated 
temperature, 
the following requirements 
of this standard 
shall be met: 

| (1)    | Paragraph    | 2.2.3    | -    | Sensitivity    | (MCW)    |
|--------|--------------|----------|------|----------------|----------|
| (2)    | Paragraph    | 2.2.4    | -    | Sensitivity    | (CW)     |
| (3)    | Paragraph    | 2.2.5    | -    | Bearing        | Accuracy |

## Immersion Test (When Required)

2.3.8.2 
The equipment shall be subjected to the test conditions as specified in RTCA/DO-160A, paragraph 11.2.2, and the following requirements of this standard shall apply: 

a. 
At the end of the 24-hour immersion period, 
the equipment 
shall operate 
at 
a level 
of performance which indicates 
that 
no significant failures 
of components 
or circuitry 
have occurred. 
-b. 
Following the two-hour operational period 
at ambient 
--`,`,,``,```,,,`````````,``,`,,-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---

temperature, 
after the 160-hour exposure period at elevated 
temperature, 
the following requirements 
of this standard 
shall 
be met: 

| (1)    | Paragraph    | 2.2.3    | -    | Sensitivity    | (MCW)    | ©    |
|--------|--------------|----------|------|----------------|----------|------|
| (2)    | Paragraph    | 2.2.4    | -    | Sensitivity    | (CW)     |      |
| (3)    | Paragraph    | 2.2.5    | -    | Bearing        | Accuracy | -    |

## Sand And Dust Test (Do-160A, Section 12.0) (When Required)

2.3.9 
The equipment shall be subjected to the test conditions as specified in RTCA/DO-160A, Section 
12.0, and the following Mr. Haber's formula for calculating the magnetizing force 
(H total) 
in terms of signal generator voltage becomes as shown, when E;, is substituted for I. 

| H    | total    |
|------|----------|
| Ey,  |          |
| Sinh |          |
| a    |          |
| Sinh |          |
| 2a   |          |
| Ast  |          |
| noe  |          |
| we,  | Cosh     |

Where Cc 
= 
) 
the signal generator output rms volts. 

and d, w, X., h, and Z,, are shown in Figure 
2-2, and E 
is To convert the above H total to field strength in volts per meter and allow the use of room dimensions in inches, multiply by 14842. 

(With the room dimensions in meters multiply by 377.) 
An example of room factor calculations is shown along with further simplification to show that knowledge of hyperbolic functions is not essential to use the formula. 

In this example, the room factor was set at 
5 
and determined Zr 

## (5) Example Of Screen Room Calculation.

Assume the following dimensions; 

| d     | =    | 20"    |
|-------|------|--------|
| X,    | =    | 40"    |
| h     | =    | 96"    |
| w=    | 96"  |        |
| Kg    | =    | 5      |
| Zr,   | =    | to     |
| a     |      |        |
| =     |      |        |
| Md    |      |        |
| =     |      |        |
| _3.14 |      |        |
| x20   |      |        |
| _     |      |        |
| 655   |      |        |
| 2a    |      |        |
| =     |      |        |
| 1.31  |      |        |
| Ww    | 96   |        |
| X     |      |        |
| b=    |      |        |
| —2    |      |        |
| =     |      |        |
| 314%  |      |        |
| 40    |      |        |
| ©     |      |        |
| 13,   |      |        |
| o»    |      |        |
| K     |      |        |
| 2.62  |      |        |
| WwW   | 96   |        |
| e     |      |        |
| =     |      |        |
| TR    |      |        |
| =     |      |        |
| 314   |      |        |
| x9)   |      |        |
| ©     |      |        |
| gy    |      |        |
| og    |      |        |
| =     |      |        |
| 6.08  |      |        |
| W     | 96   |        |
| .            | 7028    | Sinh    | 2a          |
|--------------|---------|---------|-------------|
| 1.222        | Cosh    | 2a      |             |
| 1.988        | Cosh    | 2b      |             |
| -00187       |         |         |             |
| Sinh         | a       | »       | 7028        |
| Cosh         | b-Cosh  | a       | .988-1.222  |
| -            | 3495    |         |             |
| Sinh         | 2a      | _       | 1.718       |
| Cosh         | 2b-Cosh | 2a      | 6.904-1.988 |
| he-2C        | x       | Sinh    | a           |
| .0105        |         |         |             |
| _            | E       | _       | E           |
| (m-n+p)      | L       | _       | (.9175      |
| W            | Zy,     | 96      | Zy,         |
| Ey,          | EL      |         |             |
| volts/meter  | =       | .00603  | x           |
| L            | 4,      |         |             |
| ET,          |         |         |             |
| volts        | per     | meter   |             |
| Transposing, | Ly      | =       | 89,5        |

Ey, volts per meter For a room factor of 
5, Kao 
= 
5 
= 
Substituting, Z, = 89.5 x 
5 
21, 
= 447.5 
When the line is terminated with 447.5 ohms, the room factor will be 
5. 

Install the resistor 
(R3) 
at the junction of the vertical feed and the test transmission line. 

Compute the value of R3 
as follows: 

$$\mathrm{R3~=~\frac{R2~\ x~Z_{O}}{R2~-~Z_{O}}}$$
where R2 
Z;,, the resistance terminating the transmission line, and Zo 
= the characteristic impedance of the vertical feed coax. 

It is convenient to make Z, 
50 ohms, when the signal generator output is 
50 ohms. 

Check the line for standing waves at the highest frequency to be used, by comparing VTVM readings at the feed end of the transmission line and at the terminated end of the line. 

The largest potential error in percent due to standing waves is equal to 
_E,-E, Ey x 
100. 

(6) Determination of 
the value 
of 
the Sense Antenna 
Voltage Divider 
C,of Figure 
2-3 
is the capacitance of the sense antenna for which the ADF 
is designed. 

The voltage divider Co ratio is made equal to the room factor C 
divided by the effective height of the sense antenna. 

For instance, to simulate a 
1/4 meter 
50 
pf antenna with a room factor of 
5 requires the following values: 
C, must be much greater than C,» 
so satisfactory values would be: 

i. 
Test Antenna 
- The test antenna shall be defined by the 
manufacturer and must be equivalent 
to the antenna 
specified for use with the system. 
Apply to the receiver a standard input signal at 
1000 microvolts per meter. 

Adjust the audio gain to produce 30% of rated audio output power into the load impedance for which the receiver is designed. 

Determine the change in output power from the rated output in dB and the percentage of distortion of the output signal when the receiver output load impedance is 
50% 
and when it is 
200% of that for which the receiver is designed. 

2.4.2.9 
Distortion (paragraph 2.2.9) 
RF Signal Generator 
(Hewlett Packard Model 
606A, or equivalent 
) 
AF Signal Generator 
(Hewlett Packard Model 200-B, or equivalent 
) 
Distortion and Noise Meter 
(Hewlett Packard Model 
330D, or equivalent) 
Output Power Meter (General Radio Model 583-A, or equivalent) 

Apply to the receiver an RF signal modulated 85% 
at 400 Hz. 

Adjust the receiver gain to produce rated output. 

Determine the percentage of distortion and noise in the receiver output signal. 

Conduct this test at the RF input signal level of 
1000 microvolts per meter. 

2.4.2.10 
AGC Characteristics (paragraph 2.2.10) 
RF Signal Generator 
(Hewlett Packard Model 
606A, or equivalent) 
Test Antenna Output Power Meter (General Radio Model 538-A, or equivalent) 
Shielded room equipped with a Standard Signal Generator 
(Hewlett Packard Model 606A or equivalent) 
and a test transmission line properly terminated and calibrated or a test set which simulates a standard shielded room. 

Apply a standard input signal to the receiver through a test antenna, or a test transmission line. 

Vary the input signal from 
100 microvolts per meter to 0.2 volt per meter and determine: 

a. 
The audio output power when the input signal level 
is 
100 microvolts per meter. 
b. 
The 
dB increase 
in receiver audio output power from that 
obtained 
in a. 
above 
to the maximum output power obtained 
as 
the input signal 
is increased 
to 0.2 volt per meter, 
c. 
The maximum decrease 
in audio output power over 
the range 
of input from that producing maximum audio output power 
to 
0.2 volt 
per meter, 
Conduct this test with the audio gain adjusted to produce rated audio output power. 

2.4.2.1] 
Receiver Selectivity 
-— 
(MCW Receiver Function) 
(paragraph 2.2.11) 
RF Signal Generator 
(Hewlett Packard Model 
606A, or equivalent 
) 
Output Power Meter (General Radio Model 
538-A, or equivalent) 
Test Antenna 

Apply to the receiver input a standard input signal of 
100 microvolts per meter. 

Adjust the audio gain to produce rated audio output power. 

Determine the frequencies above and below the selected frequency to which the signal generator must be tuned to produce rated audio output power when the RF signal field strength is 
6, 
12, 
42, and 
72 
dB above that required to produce rated audio output power at the frequency of maximum response. 

A measurement of RF carrier derived voltage 
(e.g. 

AGC) may be used in lieu of audio power measurement. 

2.4.2. 
12 
Receiver Selectivity 
- (Automatic Direction Finder Function) 
(paragraph 2.2.12) 
--`,`,,``,```,,,`````````,``,`,,-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
Shielded room equipped with two Standard Signal Generators 
(Hewlett Packard Model 
606A, or equivalent) 
and with two test transmission lines crossing each other at 
90 degrees, properly terminated and calibrated, or a test set which properly simulates these conditions. 

(See paragraph 2.4.1 h.). 

The circuit constants of the sense antenna circuits and line termination resistors, Ca, Ch, Cc, R2 and R3 
for ADF receivers must be such that the isolation between the test transmission lines is not less than the null depth of the directional antenna. 

Output Power Meter (General Radio Model 538-A, or equivalent) 

This test requires the use of two signal generators, one identified as Signal Generator #1 
(SG #1) 
and the other as Signal Generator #2 
(SG #2), which are individually coupled to two test transmission lines that cross each other at 
90 degrees. 

Set the receiving equipment to the ADF Function. 

Adjust SG #1 
to produce a standard input signal at a field strength of 
100 microvolts per meter. 

Tune the receiving equipment to the frequency of SG #1 and determine the indicated bearing of the desired signal. 

By means of SG #2, set up an undesired unmodulated signal field whose direction is 
90 degrees from that of the desired signal field. 

Determine the change in indicated bearing of the desired signal from the indicated bearing determined above, when SG #2 
is adjusted to produce signals of the relative field strengths and frequency displacements specified in paragraph 2.2.12. 

2.4. Qe 
13 

## Spurious Response (Paragraph 2.2.13) Equipment Required

RF Signal Generators to cover the range 
50 kHz to 
150 MHz 
(Hewlett Packard 606A and 608E, or equivalent) 
Output Power Meter 
(General Radio Model 
583-A, or equivalent) 
Test Antenna 

--`,`,,``,```,,,`````````,``,`,,-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
Apply to the receiver input through a test antenna, a standard input signal at 
100 microvolts per meter. 

Adjust the audio gain to produce rated audio output power. 

For tuned frequencies below 850 kHz 
(535 kHz for Category B), increase the input signal level by 80 dB. 

Determine the input signal frequencies at which the receiver output is rated at audio output power or greater, within the band 
50 kHz to 
150 
kHz, but excluding the frequencies within +10 kHz of the frequency to which the equipment is tuned. For tuned frequencies above 850 kHz 
(535 kHz for Category B), repeat the above measurement, but this time increase the input signal level by only 
60 dB. 

The test shall be performed at the band edges and the mid-band frequencies for either Category A or B equipment. 

A measurement of RF carrier-derived voltage 
(e.g., AGC) may be used in lieu of audio power measurement. 

2.4. 2. 
14 

## Cross Modulation (Paragraph 2.2.14) Equipment Required

Two RF Signal Generators covering the frequency range of 
50 kHz to 
150 MHz (Hewlett Packard Models 
606A and 608E, or equivalent) 
Output Power Meter (General Radio Model 538-A, or equivalent) 
Test Antenna 

This test requires the use of two signal generators, one identified as Signal Generator #1 
(SG #1), and the second as Signal THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 
--`,`,,``,```,,,`````````,``,`,,-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---

## Membership Ee Rn Special Committee 146 Minimum Operational Performance Standards For Automatic Direction Finding (Adf) Equipment Chalrman

Earl D. 

Long Aviation Systems, Inc. 

## Secretary

Rodney J. 

Jago Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics MEMBERS AND ADVISERS 
R. 

E. 

Ace Systems Control Technology, Inc. 

W. Alexander United Air Lines, Inc. 

O. Alvarez Federal Aviation Administration N. 

G. 

Bagnato Federal Communications Commission K. 

Beseke Cessna Aircraft Company, ARC Division K. 

F. Bierach Federal Aviation Administration R. 

H. 

Bostic Douglas Aircraft Company R. 

L. 

Bowers Air Transport Association of America B. 

Burbank King Radio Corporation J. 

Carocari King Radio Corporation B. 

R. Climie Aeronautical Radio, Inc. 

M. 

de Gironville EUROCAE (France) 
R. 

A. Favre Civil Aviation Authority (UK) 
J. Ferrara Cessna Aircraft Company, ARC Division N. 

A. Ferrett Civil Aviation Authority (UK) 
G. 

B. Foster Foster Air Data Systems, Inc. 

N. 

T. Fujisaki Federal Aviation Administration L. 

S. Gallemore Trans World Airlines, Inc. 

P. 

D. 

Gibbs Foster Air Data Systems, Inc. 

R. Goode Department of the Air Force J. 

B. Goodhue Southern Avionics Company Dr. 

R. 

S. Gordy Calspan Corporation G. 

N. Gromov All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Radio Equipment (USSR) 
E. 

C. Heyn Federal Aviation Administration R. 

B. Johnson Douglas Aircraft Company D. 

E. Kromer Federal Aviation Administration L. Langdon Department of Interior C. 

L. Longman Federal Aviation Administration J. 

F. Longshore McDonnell Douglas Corporation A. 

GC. Mackellar British Embassy D. 

A. Martinec Aeronautical Radio, Inc. 