
|  Issued    | 1995-01    |
|------------|------------|
| Reaffirmed | 2004-11    |

## Aerospace Standard

 
SAE Technical Standards Board Rules provide that: "This report is published by SAE to advance the state of technical and engineering sciences.  The use of this report is entirely voluntary, and its applicability and suitability for any particular use, including any patent infringement arising therefrom, is the sole responsibility of the user." 
SAE reviews each technical report at least every five years at which time it may be reaffirmed, revised, or cancelled.  SAE invites your written comments and suggestions. 

Copyright © 2004 SAE International All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of SAE. 

TO PLACE A DOCUMENT ORDER: 
                                 Tel:       877-606-7323 (inside USA and Canada) 
 
                                 Tel:      724-776-4970 (outside USA) 
 
                                 Fax:     724-776-0790 
 
                                 Email:   custsvc@sae.org 


## Sae As4492

3.2 
Host Equipment: 
Individual life preservers, life rafts, and slidelrafts and other survival equipment to which a survivor locator light may be fitted. 

3.3 Primary Batteries: 
Nonrechargeable batteries with self-contained, stored potential electrochemical systems requiring only closing of an electrical circuit for operation. 

3.4 
Reserve Batteries: 
Batteries that are chemically inert and unable to generate electrical energy until introduction of an external electrolyte (in this case, fresh or seawater). 

## 4. Minimum Performance And Design Standards:

4.1 
ConfigurationlDesign: 
The survivor locator light shall be designed and configured in such a way as to preclude harm to the survivor or adversely affect the operation, performance, or physical integrity of host equipment while packed or in active use; special care shall be taken to avoid sharp edges or protrusions. The design of the survivor locator light and its parts, including any electrical wires, shall be such to minimize snagging while the host equipment is donned or in use, including evacuation from the aircraft. 

4.2 
Materials: 
Materials used in the survivor locator light shall be compatible with materials and processes used in the construction of host equipment and shall not contribute to the degradation of same. 

4.3 
Light Characteristics: 
4.3.1 
General: Survivor locator lights may be steady on (Type i) 
or flashing (Type il). Emitted light 
shall be white, in the spectral range of 380 to 780 nn, or yellow-green, in the spectral range of 
530 to 560 nn. The device shall be capable of functioning at or above minimum light intensities 
while the integral battery is immersed in fresh or seawater at 2 O
C
,
 
uninterrupted, for a period 
of 8 h at the end of the rated service life of the battery. 
4.3.2 
Steady-Type 
Lights (Type I): The steady-type 
survivor locator light shall be shown by test to 
provide a minimum effective luminous intensity of 1 
.O candela over the operating regime 
established in 4.3.1. The minimum light output shall be provided within a minimum 1 
O beam 
width centered on the horizon (*loo) 
over a minimum of 300" of arc in the horizontal 
plane with 
gaps of no more than 30°, 
and within a minimum 1" beam width centered on the vertical (ClO). 

## Sae As4492

4.3.3 
Flashing-Type 
Lights (Type II): The flashing-type survivor locator light shall be shown by test to 
provided a minimum effective luminous intensity of 1 
.O candela over the operating regime 
established in 4.3.1, where the minimum effective luminous intensity i
s
 calculated according to 
Equation 1. The minimum light output shall be provided 
through 180 
of arc centered on the 
vertical (+lo"), 
over a minimum of 300" 
of horizontal arc with gaps of no more than 30". 
The 
flash rate shall be 60 k 
1 
O flashes per minute. 
where:

$$\begin{array}{ll}\mbox{le}&=\mbox{Effective luminous intensity}\\ \mbox{l(t)}&=\mbox{Instantaneous intensity at time t}\\ \mbox{0.2}&=\mbox{Biondel-Fey constant}\\ \mbox{t}_{1}\mbox{and t}_{2}&=\mbox{Flash time interval(seconds)}\end{array}$$

## 4.4 Power Source (Battery):

The power source for the survivor locator light shall be based on either a primary 
(nonrechargeable) 
chemical cell or a reserve battery activated and operated by the introduction of fresh or salt water. Due to the proximity of survivor locator lights to the head of survivor when fitted on individual life preservers, no battery technology may be used which will expose the survivor or the host equipment to injurious effects of explosion, flame, high exothermic heat radiation, or the discharge of toxic or incapacitating effluents under any reasonable set of operational eventualities including but not limited to one or a combination of the following: 

a. Cell rupture 
b. Puncture 
c. Short circuit 
d. Exposure to fresh or salt water 
4.4.1 Primary Batteries: In the case of primary batteries, positive means to prevent short-circuits and 
to preclude 
damage that might be caused in such eventuality must be provided; a positive 
means to prevent inadvertent 
activation of the light must also be provided. Additional design 
consideration shall be given to venting of gases generated within the cell and protection 
of the 
user and the host equipment from outgassing or cell leakage. 

4.4.2 Reserve Batteries: In 
the case of reserve batteries, a positive means of protecting the battery 
from the introduction 
of moisture and resultant deterioration 
must be provided while ensuring 
that the light activation requirements of 4.5.2 are met. 

## Sae As4492 4.5 Light Activation - General:

Activation of the survivor locator light shall be automatic upon contact with or immersion in fresh or sea water, and the activation means shall be configured, rigged, and/or located on the host equipment in such a way as to provide for automatic activation upon entry of the survivor into the water with the host equipment properly donned or deployed. The survivor locator light must be armed and ready for automatic activation when the host equipment is removed from its primary container, donned, and/or deployed. 

4.5.1 Light Activation - Primary Batteries: Activation of primary batteries may be accomplished 
with a 
reliable mechanical 
or electrical 
water-sensor. Primary batteries 
shall be designed to ensure 
that the light remains activated 
once automatic activation 
has occurred. This may be 
accomplished 
by an electrical latching 
circuit or other means. Switches which include delayedaction devices and/or moisture barriers 
shall be shown to provide 
for automatic activation of the 
device, with light output meeting 
the established minimums 
within the times provided in Table 1. 
4.5.2 
Light Activation - Reserve Batteries: Activation of reserve batteries is to be accomplished 
with 
immersion in fresh o
r
 
sea water. Such batteries 
must be designed 
for and located on the host 
equipment such that they remain immersed. A suitable means to prevent degradation of the 
battery due to moisture or humidity exposure over long term storage is required. The battery, 
along with any passive, water-soluble moisture barriers, shall be shown to be capable of 
developing sufficient power to meet minimum required 
light output within the activation times 
specified in Table 1. If the battery is provided 
with a mechanic moisture protection 
device or 
means, such as plugs, and their removal is necessary to provide 
for activation of the survivor 
locator light, these devices and/or means must be designed and rigged in such a way as to be 
automatically removed 
from the battery upon removal of the host equipment from its primary 
packaging 
or upon inflation 
of the buoyancy chambers. 

| ~~                            | ~     | ~    |
|-------------------------------|-------|------|
| Sea Water                     |       |      |
| Fresh                         | Water |      |
| 5 min at water temperature of |       |      |
| 2                             |       |      |
| O                             | C     |      |
| and higher                    |       |      |
| 10                            |       |      |
| min at water temDerature of   | 2     |      |
| O                             | C     |      |
| and hiaher                    |       |      |

Service Life Limitations: 
4
.
6
 
Service life limitations for the power source (battery) shall be established for primary and reserve batteries in accordance with the following paragraphs. Service life limitations shall be prominently marked on the battery. 

4.6.1 
Primary Batteries: Primary batteries 
for survivor locator lights shall have a rated service life 
equal to no more than that recommended 
by the primary cell manufacturer, but in no case more 
than the average time since manufacture at which self-discharge rates or other cell degradation 
mechanisms reduce available cell energy to the point that the light intensity and duration 
requirements 
of document cannot be met. Tests for light intensity and duration, as may be 
required 
to show conformance to this document, should be conducted with cells discharged to 
calculated 
end-of-service life capacity levels. 

## Sae As4492

4.6.2 Water-Activated Reserve 
Batteries: The service life for water-activated reserve batteries may 
be termed "indefinite" or "on condition" if: 
a. 
They are chemically inert prior to the introduction 
of moisture through immersion 
or 
humidity 
b. They are adequately protected 
against moisture 
degradation per **4.5.2** and 4.9.2 
c. They are not susceptible for or are properly 
protected 
against other degradation 
mechanisms 
including but not limited 
to aging (e.g., embrittlement) 
and long term vibration 
d. There is a stated means 
to test for and/or identify reserve batteries 
that are inoperable 
or 
compromised 
to the extent that they cannot meet the recommended 
operational 
requirements 
of this document. 
In cases where reserve battery service life cannot be defined as "indefinite" or "on condition" as specified, the stated service life shall be no more than that recommended by the manufacturer, but in no case more than the average time since manufacture at which self-discharge rates or other degradation mechanisms reduce available cell energy to the point that the minimum requirements of this document cannot be met. 

## 4.7 Attachment Provisions:

The design of the survivor locator light and any detached and/or connected components, such as battery packs, shall include provisions for secure attachment to host equipment such that when properly installed, the light and any remote parts cannot be removed except by deliberate action. 

Special consideration shall be given to attachment security under conditions related to evacuation from the aircraft, entry into the water, entry onto flotation platforms, and rescue. 

## 4.8 Moisture Protection:

The survivor locator light (with exception of the battery section of water-activated reserve batteries) shall be waterproof and exhibit no evidence of moisture penetration when tested in accordance with 4.9.6. 

## 4.9 Tests:

The following tests represent the minimum required for qualification of survivor locator lights to this document. These tests are applicable to both primary and reserve battery power units, except as noted. Each test is to be conducted on a minimum of three randomly selected test articles. Test articles are to be production units or representative of production units in all respects. The test articles must be shown to activate automatically and illuminate upon immersion in fresh water at 70 O
C
 (I3 
O
C
)
 
after each test (except the waterproofness test of 
4
.

9
.

6
)
.

 

4.9.1 
Luminous Intensity: The effective luminous intensity requirements 
of **4.3.1** and/or 4.3.2 shall be 
demonstrated using standard photometric 
measuring 
techniques. 

4.9.2 Humidity: Perform the tests outlined in **RTCA** Document DO-l60C, paragraph 
6.3.1 (Category 
A - Standard Humidity Test). 
4.9.3 
Operation Shock and Crash Safety: Perform the tests outlined in RTCA Document DO-1 
60C, 
Section 7.0 (impulse 
tests only). 
4.9.4 
Vibration: Perform 
the tests outlined in RTCA Document DO-1 
60C. Section **8.0,** corresponding 
to "standard" vibration (paragraph 
8.5), 
per vibration test curve "B" 
on 
Table **8-1** and Figure 8-1 
(fixed wing turbojet, instrument 
panel/console 
and equipment rack mounted. on 
vibration 
insulators). 
4.9.5 
Explosion Proofness: Perform 
the tests outlined in RTCA Document **DO-l6ûC,** Section 9.0 for 
Environment 
I conditions, Category A equipment. 
4.9.6 
Operation and Waterproofness: Each test sample shall be submerged in fresh water 
maintained 
at 20 O
C
 
k 
3 O
C
 to a depth of 1 
r
n
 **(39.3** in) for a period of at least 8 h. The tests 
articles shall exhibit proper activation function and illuminate 
for the entire test period. 
Inspection 
of the test articles 
after the test shall yield no evidence of water penetration 
(with the 
exception 
of the battery in configurations using water-activated 
reserve batteries). 
4.9.7 
Salt Spray: Perform the spray proof tests outlined in RTCA Document DO-l6OC, Section 14, 
for Category S equipment. 