
## Cloth, Airplane, Cotton, Mercerized 65 Lb (290 N) Breaking Strength 1. Scope:

l.l Form: This specification covers one strenqth and one weave of inercerized 
cotton known as "airplane cloth." 
1.2 Application: Primarily for covering aircraft surfaces, such as wings, 
fuselage, ailerons, elevators, and other airfoil surfaces. 
2.
APPLICABLE DOCUMENTS: The following publications fo ml a part of this 
specification to the extent specified herein. The latest issue of Aerospace 
Material Specifications (AMS) shall apply. The applicable issue of other 
documents shall be as specified in AMS 2350. 
2.1 SAE Publications: Available from SAE, 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, 
PA 15096. 
2.1.1 Aerospace Material Specifications: 
AMS 2350 - Standards and Test Methods 

2.2 ASTM Publications: Available from American Society for Testing and 
Materials, 1916 Race Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103. 
ASTM D629 - Quantitative Analysis of Textiles ASTM D1682 - Breaking Load and Elongation of Textile Fabrics ASTM D1910 - Construction Characteristics of Woven Fabrics 

2.3 U.S. Government Publications: Available from Commanding Officer, Naval 
Publications and Forms Center, 5801 Tabor Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19120. 
2.3.1 Military Standards: 
MIL-STD-794 - Parts and Equipment, Procedures for Packaging and Packing of SAE Technical Board Rules provide that: "This report is published by SAE to advance the state of technical and engineering sciences. The use of this report is entirely voluntary, and its applicability and suitability for any particular use, including any patent infringement arising therefrom, is the sole responsibility of the user." 

## 3. Technical Requirements:

3:1 Material: 
3.1.1 Mercerization: The cloth shall be piece mercerized or the yarn may be 
mercerized under tension. 
3.1.2 Yarn: The cloth shall be woven from 1- or 2-ply, combed cotton yarn. 
3.1.3 Weave: The weave shall be plain (one up and one down). 
3.1.4 Finishing: The cloth shall be uniformly finished in accordance with the 
best practice for high-grade airplane cloth. Finishing shall consist of 
washing, framing, and calendering. The calendering shall be sufficient to 
lay any nap present and shall provide a smooth, even surface. Nap may be removed by singeing. 
3.2 Properties: The cloth shall conform to the following requirements; tests 
shall be performed on the cloth supplied and in accordance with specified 
test methods: 

3.2.1 Weight: 	
ASTM D1910 
oz per sq yd, max 
(g/m2 , max) 
4.0 
(135) 
3.2.2 Thread Count, ends per in. (25.4 mm): 
Warp and Fill, each, max 
ASTM D1910 
80 to 94 
3.2.3 Breaking Strength, each direction: 
lbf per in. width, min 
(N/25 mm width, min) 
ASTM D1862, 
Ravelled strip 
65 	
method 
(290) 
3.2.4 Elongation: 	
Warp 	
Fill 	
ASTM D1862, 
(See 4.5.1) 
At 57 lb (255 N) load, max 	
13$ 	
11~ 
3.2.5 Sizing, Finishing, and Other 	
ASTM D629, 
Non-Fibrous Materials, max: 	
2.5$ 	
Equation 3 

3.2.5.1 A desizing operation may be performed to reduce the sizing content to 
the maximum specified. 
3.3 Quality: The cotton fibers shall be evenly spun into yarns of proper and 
uniform yarn count, twist, and diameter to produce the texture and weight 
required. The yarn shall be reasonably free from nap breaks, broken ends, 
uneven threads, and knots. Yarns shall be closely woven into fabric uniform 
in body and appearance, and which shall be reasonably free from striations 
due to variable weaving operations. 
3.4 Tolerances: Unless otherwise specified, the following tolerances apply: 3.4.1 Width: 

Nominal Width Tolerance, Inches Nominal Width Tolerance, Millimetres 
Inches 	
plus and minus 	
Millimetres 	
plus and minus 
~ 
36 
1/2 
915 
13 
42 
5/8 
1065 
16 
60 
1 
1525 
25 
69 
1 
1750 
25 
90 
1-1/2 
2285 
38 

3.4.2 Length of Cut: The length of a single cut shall be not less than 40 yd 
(36.5 m) except that 10~ of the total yardaqe of one width under any 
contract or order may be in short lengths of 10 to 25 yd (9 to 23 m). 
However, short lengths shall be rolled together and the roll properly labeled to indicate that it is composed of short lengths. 
3.4.3 Length of Roll: The cloth shall be furnished on rolls containing the 
following lengths: 

Nominal Width 
Inches 
Roll Length 
Yards 
Nominal Width 
Millimetres 
Roll Length 
Metres 
36 and 42 
60 and 69 
90 
500 to 600 
250 to 300 175 to 200 
915 and 1065 
1525 and 1750 
2285 
457 to 548 
229 to 274 160 to 183 

## 4. Quality Assurance Provisions:

4.1 Responsibility for Inspection: The vendor of cloth shall supply all 
f~ samples for vendor's tests and shall be responsible for performing all 
required tests. Results of such tests shall be reported to the purchaser as 
required by 4.6. Purchaser reserves the right to sample and to perform any 
confirmatory testing deemed necessary to ensure that the cloth conforms to 
the requirements of this specification. 

## 4.2 Classification Of Tests:

4.2.1 
Acceptance Tests: 
Tests to determine conformance to requirements for 
~! 	
weight (3.2.1), thread count (3.2.2), breaking strength (3.2.3), elongation (3.2.4), quality (3.3), and tolerances (3.4) are classified as 
acceptance tests and shall be performed on each lot. 	
~~ 
4.2.2 Preproduction Tests: Tests to determine conformance to all technical 
~ 	
requiremen~s of this specification are classified as preproduction tests 
- 	
and shall be performed prior to or on the initial shipment of cloth to a 
purchaser, when a change in material or processing, or both, requires 
reapproval as in 4.4.2, and when purchaser deems confirmatory testing to 
be required. 
4.2.2.1 For direct U.S. Military procurement, substantiating test data and, when 
~ 	
requested, preproduction test material shall be submitted to the 
cognizant agency as directed by the procuring activity, the contracting 
officer, or the request for procurement. 

## 4.3 Sampling: Shall Be As Follows:

4.3.1 For Acceptance Tests: Each lot of cloth shall be 100$ visually examined 
~ 	
for quality (3.3). Sufficient cloth shall be taken at random from each 
lot to perform all required tests; the number of determinations for each 
requirement shall be as specified in the applicable test procedure or, if not specified therein, not less than three, ~aken from the full width of 
the cloth. 
4.3.1.1 A lot shall be all cloth produced in a single production run under the 
~ 	
same conditions and presented for vendor's inspection at one time. An inspection lot shall not exceed 5000 yd (4600 m). A lot may be packaged in small quantities under the basic lot approval provided the lot identification is maintained. 
4.3.1.2 When a statistical sampling plan and acceptance quality level (AQL) have 
~ 	
been agreed upon by purchaser and vendor, sampling shall be in 
accordance with such plan in lieu of sampling as in 4.3.1 and the report 
of 4.6.1 shall state that such plan was used. 
4.3.2 For Preproduction Tests: As agreed upon by purchaser and vendor. 
~ 

## 4.4 Approval:

4.4.1 Sample cloth shall be approved by purchaser before cloth for production 
use is su~plied, unless such approval be waived by purchaser. Results of 
tests on production cloth shall be essentially equivalent to those on the approved sample. 
4.4.2 Vendor shall use ingredients, manufacturing procedures, processes, and 
~ 	
methoda of inspection on production cloth which are essentially the same 
as those used on the approved samp~e cloth. If necessary to make any 
change in ingredients, in type of equipment for processing, or in 
manufacturing procedures, vendor shall submit for reapproval a statement 
of the proposed changes in material or processing, or both, and, when 
requested, sample cloth. Production cloth made by the revised procedure shall not be shipped prior to receipt of reapproval. 

## 4.5 Test Methods:

4.5.1 Elongation: Shall be measured from a base line on the chart to a point at 
which the curve intersects 57 lb (255 N) load ordinate with the base line 
passing through the point where the curve leaves the zero ordinate. 

## 4.6 Reports:

4.6.1 The vendor of cloth shall furnish with each shipment three copies of a 
~ 	
report showing the results of tests to determine conformance to the 
acceptance test requirements and stating that the cloth conforms to the 
other technical requirements of this specification. This report shall 
include the purchase order number, AMS 3804C, vendor's material 
designation, lot number, width, and quantity. 
4.6.2 The vendor of finished or semi-finished parts shall furnish with each 
~ 	
shipment three copies of a report showing the purchase order number, 
AMS 3804C, contractor or other direct supplier of cloth, supplier's 
material designation, and quantity. When cloth for making parts is 
produced or purchased by the parts vendor, that vendor shall inspect each 
lot of cloth to determine conformance to the requirements of this 
specification and shall include in the report either a statement that the 
cloth conforms or copies of laboratory reports showing the results of 
tests to determine conformance. 	
~ 
4.7 Resampling and Retesting: If any specimen used in the above tests fails to 
Q~ meet the specified requirments, disposition of the cloth may be based on the 
results of testing three additional specimens for each original nonconforming specimen. Failure of any retest specimen to meet the 
specified requirements shall be cause for rejection of the cloth represented 
and no additional testing shall be permitted. Results of all tests shall be 
reported. 

## 5. Preparation For Delivery:

5.1 Identification: The cloth shall incorporate a continuous marking to show 
not less than the manufacturer's name or trade mark and AMS 3804C. This 
marking may be along the selvage. 

## 5.2 Packaging:

5.2.1 Packaging shall be accomplished in such a manner as to ensure that the 
cloth, during shipment and storage, will not be permanently distorted and 
will be protected against damage from exposure to moisture, weathering, or any other normal hazard. 
5.2.2 Each package shall be permanently and legibly marked to show not less than 
g 	
the following information; characters shall be of such size as to be 
. 	
legible and shall not be obliterated by normal handling: 
CLOTH, AIRPLANE, COTTON, MERCERIZED, 65 lb BREAKING STRENGTH 
AMS 3804C 
YARDAGE 
WIDTH 
DATE OF MANUFACTURE 
LOT NUMBER 
MANUFACTURER'S IDENTIFICATION 
PURCHASE ORDER NUMBER 

5.2.3 Packages shall be prepared for shipment in accordance with commercial 
Q~ 	
practice and in compliance with applicable rules and regulations 
pertaining to the handling, packaging, and transportation of the cloth to 
ensure carrier acceptance and safe delivery. Packaging shall conform to 
carrier rules and regulations applicable to the mode of transportation. 
5.2.4 For direct U.S. Military procurement, packaging shall be in accordance 
~ 	
with MIL-STD-794, Level A or Level C, as specified in the request for 
procurement. Commercial packaging as in 5.2.1 and 5.2.3 will be 
acceptable if it meets the requirements of Level C. 
6.
ACIQ~IOWLEDGMENT: A vendor shall mention this specification number and its 
revision letter in all quotations and when acknowledging purchase orders. 
7.
REJECTIONS: Cloth not conforming to this specification or to modification 
authorized by purchaser will be subject to rejection. 
8.
NOTES: 
8.1 Marginal Indicia: The phi (~) symbol is used to indicate technical 
changes from the previous issue of this specification. 
8.2 Dimensions and properties in inch/pound units are primary; dimensions and 
properties in SI units are shown as the approximate equivalents of the 
inch/pound units and are presented only for information. 
8.3 For direct U.S. Military procurement, purchase documents should specify not 
less than the following: 

Title, number, and date of this specification 
Width of cloth desired 
Quantity of cloth desired 
Applicable level of packaging (See 5.2.4) 

8.4 Cloth meeting the requirements of this specification has been classified 
under Federal Supply Classification (FSC) 8305. 
This specification is under the jurisdication of AMS Committee "C" (NOMETCOM). 