a00 COMMONWEALTM DRIVE, WARRENDALE, PA. 15088 

## 1. Scope

1.1 Purpose: This standa,rd defines the~minimum requirement for the design, construction and performance of continuous flow oxygen masks for crew and passengers of general aviation civil aircraft. 
1.2 Types: This standard includea the following types of continuoua flow oxygen masks. 
a.
Open port dilution rebreathing masks. 
b.
Valved or restrictive phase dilution rebreathing maska. 
c.
Valved or restrictive phase dilution reservoir masks. 
d.
Open port or restrictive dilution mask without rebreathing 
or reservoir bag. 
wa ~ 
d maa m °' ~ 
CDN 
7/7 d d mL C W ~' 
~~ w 
~o~, 
~on a ° 
dET 
;om 
.~~ 
.o d~t t u 
~«t 
-'` c 3 
~d« 
oEc 
«d Z•._ .. 

~ 
,°~Ea 
~ uv 
:« 
~~o_ 
v~~" 
d~5~ 
~d~m 
~u~a E `~m` ond« 
d~~d v«E 
u°'~°u 
- E_~ 

1. 3 Description; The masks shall be of an oronasal type covering the noae and mouth, utilizing a continuous supply of oxygen and consisting of the facepiece, valving, mask suspension device, rebreathing or reservoir bag (except Type "d"), supply tube, and including connector and flow indicator 
(when used). 
n u "
3
' ,`c_ 
d~ 
v".r'° 
c 
~ 
o'E _ 
1. 4 Definition: The mask types are defined as follows: 

,~`~ o'n 
~ 	p C V m 
6~~.. ~ fn N N - C 
a¢cm 
N~~ 
~~~d 
«~, 
AWo 
N Om N 
ooda,E 
~.~v 
'v °' ~ 
Open port dilution rebreathing mask - Thia is a type of mask incorpora.ting a 
rebreather bag into which exhaled gases, high in oxygen content from the first 
portion of the previous exhalation, are introduced to be inspired again upon the 
next inapiration. Dilution of oxygen flowing into the mask ia accompliahed by 
fixed nonvariable orificea incorporated in the body of the mask or system, allowing dilution by introduction of ambient air during inapiration. Valving is not 
present between the mask facepiece and rebreathing bag. 

b. Valved or reatrictive phase dilution rebreathing mask - This type of mask may 
be either of the following: 

u ~ C m 
_~ n;, 
u 
q~+mN 
Cy-o 
°QEun 
dd~ 
dt: 
~mdm 
~ `°"a 
C O m'N 
L ~ C C 

(1)
A mask utilizing a rebreather bag into which a constant flow of oxygen ia introduced. A check valve between the mask and ambient air is provided 
so that the ambient air will not be admitted before the rebreather bag has 
been depleted. Valving ie not present between the mask facepiece and the 
rebreather bag, or 
(2)
A mask utilizing a rebreathing bag but incorporating a reatrictive sponge or other means which admits dilution air when subjected to a significant decrease in intra-mask pressure. Valving is not present between the 
mask facepiece and rebreather bag. 

M N j O 
d0~ 
a~~o 
~~ 
~W°o 
~ mn 
~~~m 
->omm 
o>>~ 
$`E 
,~ 	
o 
0 •- ~ N 
` y C Y 
~ 
v !^ Y ~ 
a 
qoo> 
mqu" 
u 
uo~g 
t ~~d 
o~e: 
Q~c° w~mE 

## ~

Valved or restrictivephase-dilution reserv~ir mask - Thia type of mask provides the most efficient phyaiological use of constant-flow aircraft oxygen and may be one of the following: 

(1) A mask utilizing a reservoir bag incorporating a check valve between the mask face- 
,_~ piece and reservoir bag to prevent introduction of exhaled gasea into the reservoir 
bag and'to aseure 100% oxygen in the reservoir. Dilution is accomplished at the la.ter 
pha.ses of inapiration by a loaded ambient air valve which introduces ambient sir 
following depletion of the 100%o oxygen content of the reservoir bag, or 
(2) Apha.se-dilution mask utilizing a reservoir bag with valve between the bag and the mask. 
A porous restrictive dilution port to provide inha.la,tion of ambient air at a slower rate 
than oxygen from the reservoir, furthermore permitting the exhaled air to leave the maek. 
d. Open-port or restrictive-dilution mask without rebreathing or reservoir bag - This mask ia 
defined as a mask which incorporates dilution ports or restrictive dilution such as by the use of open-cell foam construction or one or more air inlet valvea. This mask is not recommended for efficient phyaiological uae of the aircraft oxygen, commensurate with requirements for pilot safety or survival in hypoxic environments at altitude. 

## 2. Materials

2.1 General: Materials shall be of type, grade and quality which experience and/or tests have shown to 
~ be suitable for the purpose intended. Materials shail not be
.  used which contaminate oxygen or 
are adversely affected by continuous service with oxygen. Materiais shall have at least flame resistant porperties as defined in the Federal Aviation Regulations Part 1, Paragraph 1.1. 
i 	
shall b free of ob'ectionable odors. . Materials in contact with the skin shall 	
~ 
2.1.1 Facepiece: Thefacep ece 
	
e 
	
~ 
be selected to be as non-irritating, non-allergenic, soft and compliant to the facial configuration as practical. 
2. i. 2 Cleaning and Sterilizing: The mask shall be made of materials which will permit cleaning and steriliza- 
~ tion without adverse effects and without disassembly. The method of cleaning and aterilizing shall be 
recommended by the manufacturer. 
2.1.3 Elastomer Components: A tag or leaflet describing elastomeric components with service life limits 
~ 	
and a suggested method for inspection and detection of any deterioration in these components which 
may adversely affect the performance of the mask shall be attached to or included in the packaged mask prior to delivery to the user. 
2.1. 4 Fun~,us: Components shall be fungus-proofed by selection of parts and materials that are non-nutrient to 
fungus, or by treatment of the parts and materials prior to their use. 
2.1. 5 Dissimilar Metals; Unless suitably protected against electrolytic corrosion, dissimila.r metals shall 
not be used in intimate contact with each other. 

## 3. Workmanship

3.1 General: The mask shall be fabricated and finished in accorda.nce with the highest grade practice in the 
manufacture of this type of equipment. The finished mask and all internal parts shall be clean throughout 
and free of fins, burrs, scale, oils, materials or any other conditions which might adversely affect the 
safe operation of the mask. 
3. 2 F`inish: All materials which are not inherently corrosion-resistant shall be finished with a protective 
treatment or coating to minimize the effect of exposure to the environmental conditions which may be encountered in the service for which the equipment is intended. The protective treatxnent or coating 
shall not chip, flake, or powder, or otherwise contaminate the mask. 
3. 3 Stren h: The rebreather bag, reservoir bag, oxygen supply tube, and facepiece shall be assembled in 
such a manner that when supported at the inlet end of the supply inlet, the assembly sha11 support a static load of 20 lb (90 I~, applied at the facepiece for a period of 3 sec after having been subjected to the 
environmenta.l conditions as specified in 3. 4.1.1. 
All components of the mask assembly sha11 be resistant to tears, snags, embrittlement and cracking, and all other defects leading to malfunction of the article, which might be caused by normal handling during the service life. 

3.3.1 Rebreather or Reservoir Bag (when uset~: The rebreather or reservoir bag shall be easily removed 
and replaced, but should be so designed that it may not be inadvertently detached while in use. 
3. 3.1.1 Bag StrenQth: The rebreather or reservoir bag shall be capable of withstanding 2 psi (13. 8 kPa) 
~ 	
pressure for 3 sec without failure or da.mage and constructed of a pliable material to preclude 
compromise of valve sequencing a.nd the oxygen/dilution cycle of rebreathing and phase dilution 
masks. 
3.3.1. 2 Ba~ Assembly: The bag, when used, shall be attached to the facepiece and tubing with suffitcient 
~ strength to withstand a pull force on the bag in any direction of 5 lb (22. 2 1~ for 3 sec and made of 
flexible material which will collapse when not in use. The bags shall h ave the following minimum 
and maximum capacities when inflated to 0.5 in. H 20 (124 Pa) positive pressure: 

Mini.mum Volume Ma~dmum Volume 
~~'Pe 	
(~3) 	
(~~3) 
Rebreather 	
800 	
1,000 
Reservoir 	
1,000 	
1,500 

## 3. 3. 2 Facepiece Assembly:

3.3. 2.1 Fit: The facepiece shall be of sufficient resilience, size, and shape to conform readily to facial contours using no more pressure than supplied by the mask suspension device. Mask design should 
consider extremes of Nasion-Menton, Bizygomatic, Bigonial, and Nasion-S~pramentale distances 
and other applicable anthropometric information required to provide an adequate flt. Suggested 
sources of information include: 
Adults: An Anthropometric Sizing Program for Oral-Nasal Oxygen Masks Based on 1967 U. S. Air 
Force Survey Data, AMRL Technical Report 75-51, McConville and Alexander. 
Anthropometry of Air Force Women, AMRL Technical Report 70-5, April 1972, C. E. Clauser, et al. 

Anthropometric Sizing and FYt-Test of the MC-1 Oral-Nasal Oxygen Mask, WADC 
Technical Report 58-505, March 1959, Emanuel, Alexander, and Churchill. Recommended Subject Selec'tion and Test Procedure for Quantitative Respirator Testing, J. T. McConville, E. Churchill and A. Hack, Health, Education & Welfare Contract HSM-99-75-15, Nov. 30, 1973. 

Anthropometery for Respirator Sizing, J. T. McConville, E. Churchill, and L. L. Lauback, Health, Education & Welfare Contract No. HSM-099-71-11, Apri130, 1972. 

Children: Selected Facial Measurements of Children for Oxygen Mask Design, J. W. Young, FAA, Office of Aviation Medicine, Civil Aeromedical Institute, Report AM 66-9, April 1966, Okla. City, Okla. 

3.3. 2. 2 Volume: The chamber formed between the face and the mask shall be so configured as to provide 
proper fit and adequa.te comfort with minimal deadspace which could contribute to carbon dioxide 
retention. 
3.3. 2. 3 Resilience: The main body of the mask sha11 be resilient enough to minimize deformation due to 
stowage and incorrect handling, which might compromise operating performance. 
3.3. 2.4 Valve Desi~n: When used, dilution valve cracking pressure and resistance must be related to 
oxygen inflow resistance in order to assure proper phasing of the oxygen/dilution cycle. Other 
valves, when used, shall be designed to offer the following maximum resistance: 

| Oxygen inflow valve: 0. 8 in. H20 (200 Pa) at 30 L/min. (. 030 m   |  3   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------|------|
| /min. ) NTPD*                                                      |      |
| 2. 0 in. HZO (498 Pa) at 70 L/min. (0. 70 m                        | 3    |
| /min. ) NTPD                                                       |      |
| Exhalation valve:                                                  |      |
| 0 (498 Pa) at 85 L/min. (. 085 m                                   | 3    |
| /min. ) NTPD                                                       |      |

3.3. 2. 5 Attachment of the Mask S~spension Device: Provisions shall be made on the facepiece for attaching 
a mask suspension device. 
3.3. 3 Mask Suspension Device: A simple mask suspension device shall be provided for holding the mask on 
the user's face. A simple means of adjusting the tightness of the mask to the face shall be provided. 
3.3.4 ~bing: The oxygen supply tube which is to be used for connecting the mask assembly to the oxygen 	
supply source shall be lightweight and adequate for its intended use. The tubing shall be fully flexible 
within a temperature range of -20°F (-29°C) to 160°F (71°C). The tubing shall be capable of being bent 
to a 1. 0 in (2.54 cm) radius during stowage with less than 5% restriction to flow at 30 L/min. 
(. 030 m3/min.) NTPD upon being removed from stowage. 

## 3.4 Performance Requirement: 3.4.1 Environmental Conditions:

3. 4.1.1 Temperature and Humidity: The assembly sha11 be capable of being stowed at temperatures of 160°F 
(71°C) for 120 hr and -67°F (-55°C) for 2 hr, at relative humidities varying from 5% to 95%, without 
affecting subsequent performance after return to normal temperature of 70°F (21°C) for 30 minutes. 
3. 4.1. 2 Condensation: Operation of the equipment shall not be adversely affected by moisture accumulated 
during use. 
3. 4.1.3 Vibration: The mask assembly sha11 be capable of performing adequately after exposure to one 
million cycles, or 8 hr, of vibration at the resonant frequency orfrequencies as det~~,uined by a 
scan of vibration ~requencies as plotted in Figure 1, NAS 1179, Feb. 1961. At each resona.nt frequency detected, the mask shall be exposed to one million cycles or 8 hr vibration at rhis frequency 
and amplitude, as shown in FYgure 1, with the mask mounted: (a) with the direction uf the vibration in line with the principal axis of the mask, and (b) in a direction perpendicular to the principal axis of the mask. 
If no resonances are found with the frequency range of Figure 1, vibrate the mask at 100 cycles per sec 
(100 Hz) and the corresponding amplitude of Figure 1, for one million cycles in each direction. 

*NTPD - Normal temperature (21°C, 70°~, normal pressure (760 mm Hg, 14. 7 psi, 101 kPa), Dry. 

3.4.1. 4 Leakage Tests: Gas and supply tube leakage - with all openings to the mask facepiece sealed, apply 
a pressure of at least 2 in H20 (498 Pa) to the supply tube inlet. The gas bag, including connections 
to the facepiece and supply tubing, shall not exhibit a leakage in excess of 10 cm 3 
 per min when 
pressurized to the above value. 

## 4. Mask Performance

4.1 Use: It is the intent of this sta.ndard that the mask assembly, as used by passengers and crewmembers of 
non-pressurized and pressurized general aviation aircraft, shall be capable of maintaining during 
inspiration a mean tracheal oJCygen partial pressure of no less than 100 mm Hg (13. 33 kPa) when engaged 
in flights not to exceed 35,000 ft (10~ 668 m). Consta.nt-flow passenger masks which provide reliable concentrations approaching 100% oxygen shall be provided passengers of pressurized aircraft engaged in 
flights above 35,000 ft (10,668~m) and not to exceed 41,000 ft (12,497 m) for which a potential exists for 
pressurization failure and emergency cabin decompression to the flight altitude of the aircraft. These masks designs shall be capable of maintauung a mean tracheal oa~ygen partial pressure of no less than 
83. 8 mm Hg (11.17 kPa) during inspiration. It is recommended that constant-flow oxygen masks as 
deta.iled in this standard not be used by those individuals in control of pressurized or non-pressurized aircraft above an altitude of 35, 000 ft (10, 668 m). Oxygen requirements and masks for crew~embers 
controlling aircraft at higher altitudes are detailed in AIR 825A, AIR 1069, and AS 452A. 
4.1.1 Altitude Limitations: It is recommended that constant-flow masks of the following types be limited to 
the following altitudes depending upon their use in pressurized or non-pressurized aircraft and whether 
they are to be worn by the passengers or by individuals in control of the aircraft. These altitude limitations are based on theoretical equipment capabilities and do not necessarily account for variations in 
the degree of training, physical activity, duration of exposure, general health, and/or altitude tolerance 
of the user. a. Open port dilution rebreathing mask (passengers & crew). 

1.
Pressurized ------------------------------------------------ 27,OOOfeet (8,230 m) 
2.
Non-Pressurized -------------------------------------------- 25,OOOfeet (7,620 m) 

b. Valved or restrictive phase-dilution rebreathing masks 
(passengers & crew). 

1.
Pressurized ------------------------------------------------ 35, 000 feet (10, 668 m) 
2.
Non-Pressurized -------------------------------------------- 30, OUO feet (9
9 144 m) 

c. Valved or restrictive phase-dilutionreservoir masks (passengers). 

1.
Pressurized ------------------------------------------------ 41,OOOfeet (12,497 m) 
2.
Non-Pressurized -------------------=------------------------ 35;OOOfeet(10,668 m) 
(c rew) 1.
Pressurized ------------------------------------------------ 35, 000 feet (10, 668 m) 
2.
Non-Pressurized -------------------------------------------- 35, 000 feet (10, 668 m) 

d. Open port or restrictive phase-dilutionmask without a rebreather or 
reservoir bag (passenger & crew). 

1.
Pressurized ------------------------------------------------ 20, 000 feet (6,996 m) 
2.
Non-Pressurized -------------------------------------------- 15, 000 feet (4,572 m) 

4.1. 2 Performance Test "A": The performance of the mask shall be established by first determining a typical 
fit leakage value on representative randomly selected subjects, and then testing the maskonabreathingma 
chine which can consistently produce the minute and tidal volumes specified. The typical fit •leakage teats 
shall be carried out as specified in para. 4.1. 7.1 of NAS 1179. In lieu of the leakage-test method pre- 
~ 	
scribed in NAS 1179, 4. 1. 7. 1. 1, the nitrogen dilution method (which is considered to be a more definitive leakage test) as detailed in the final report of FAA Contract No. FAA-885, Feb. 8, 1962, may be used. 
A suitable rapid response respiratory mass spectrograph capable of breath-by-breath analysis may also 
be utilized in determining mask leakage. 
4.1.2.1 Breathing Machine Tests With Typicai Fit Leakage: When using a breathing machine for test purposes; 
hermetically seal the facepiece of the test mask against the face of the breathing machine and incorporate a mechanism to provide the typical fit leakage. A suitable gas sampling orifice shall be provided in the portion of the breathing machine representing the trachea. The breathing machine shall have a simulated tracheal dead space of approximately 150 cm 3 ; and shall insure a thorough mixing of the gases in 
the simulated lung. The respiratory rate and tidal volume shall be sufficiently adjustable to meet requirements of this standard. The simulated respiratory flow shall essentially follow a pattern such as 
occurs in human respiration. An outline of a typical dynamic testing system for demand regulators 
which may be modified for constant-flow system testing is detailed in ARP 1109. 
4.1.2.2 Tracheal Oxygen Partial Pressure Breathing Machine Test: For each representative mask tested 
the tracheal oa~ygen partial preasure shall be determined at 13.37 L/min. NTPD (15 L/min. BTPS*) 
and with a tidal volume of 623 cm 3 
 NTPD (700 cm3 
 BTPS~ and 26. 7 L/min. NTPD (30 L/min. BTPS) 
with a tidal volume of 980 cm 3 
 NTPD (1100 cm3 
 BTPS7 using the minimum mass oxygen flow curve 
as specified in 23.1443 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (See Appendix 1). If the specified flows 
are not adequate to provide the tracheal oxygen partial pressures specified in 4.1 then the additional 
oxygen flow to provide these tracheal oxygen partial pressures at 5, 000 ft (1, 524 m) increments 
shall be recorded. 
4.1. 2.3 Inspired Carbon Dioxide Breathin~ Machine Test: The complete mask shall be tested by attaching and 
sealing the facepiece to a dummy head connected to a breathing machine which operates at a breathing 
rate of 20 cycles permin. with a displacement of 750 cm 3/cycle. Oxygen containing 5% CO 2 
 shall be 
exhaled into the facepiece. With oxygen flowing to the mask at the flow rate reconunended by the 
manufacturer, the partial pressure of COZ in inspired air; measured at the mouth of the dummy's head, 
shall not exceed an average of 20 mm Hg (2. 67 kPa) during the inspiratory portion of any cycle. 
(Ref. : Department of the Interior, Bureau of Mines, 4800 Forbes St. , Pittsburgh, Pa. - Report 
Number RI-6865. 
4.1.3 Performance Test "B" (human subjects at altitude): Human testing at altitude shall be performed as 
specified in 4.1. 8 ~f NAS 1179 with the exception that only five subjects need be evaluated and exercise 
may be used to stixnulate respiration to the desired minute and tidal volume in lieu of voluntary hyperventilation. The masks shall demonstrate a capability of providing a tracheal oxygen partial pressure of 
l00 mm Hg (13. 33 kPa) at altitudes and flow rates specified in para. 23.1443 of the Federal Aviation 
Regulations (See Appendix 1), with the exception that masks designed for and used by passengers only may 
demonstrate a capability of providing a tracheal oxygen partial pressure of 83. 8 mm Hg (11.17 kPa) above 
an altitude of 35, 000 ft (10, 668 m) up to and including 40, 000 ft (12,192 m). If performance test "A" or 
"B" indicates the mask design is incapable of providing the specified tracheal oxygen partial pressures of 
100 mm Hg or 83. 8 mm Hg (13. 33 kPa or 11.17 kPa) as specified in this section, the tracheal oxygen 
partial pressures shall be recorded as noted in 4.1. 2. 2. 

## 5. Quality Assurance Provisions

5. 1 The manufacturer shall perform, or cause to be performed, the tests covered in this standa,rd for initial 
qualification of the mask. Tests called for in paragraphs 3. 3, 3. 3.1, 4. 1.2, 4. 1.2. 1, 4.1.2.2, and 
4.1. 3 shall be performed on no less than five representative masks. Tests called for in 3. 3. 5, 3. 4.1.1, 
3. 4.1. 3, and 3.4. 1. 4 shall be performed on no less than one mask. Each test mask shall be individually 
'identified and representative of production units. 
*BTPS - Body temperature (37°C, 98. 6°F), Ambient pressure, saturated with water vapor (pH 2O = 47 mm Hg = 
6.3 kPa). 