# Of Automotive Orive. Warrendale. Engineers, Pa (5096 Inc.

## Miniwm Safe Performance Over Speed Warning Instruments

1
,
 
PURPOSE 
T
h i s
 
Aerospace Standard (AS) establishes the minimum performance Standards for Over Speed Warning Instruments for use in subsonic aircraft. It is intended that this Over Speed Warning Instrument operate an aurai warning device to annunciate the attainment of a maximum permissible speed level. 

2
.
 
SCOPE 
This A
S
 defines instruments which use inputs of static and pitot pressure equhl to those which are utilized to establish the pressure aititude and speed of that aircraft. These pressures are applied to the instrument ports to provide means **for** generation of an aural warning whenever the aircraft reaches or exceeds the maximum operating limit speed. This Over Speed Warning Instrument function may be incorporated as part of an Air Data Computer, or an Air Speed Indicator, or an Air Speed/Mach Number indicator, or other instruments. in those cases where the Over Speed Warning Instrument is par€ 
of another instrument, the standards contained herein apply only to the Over Speed Warning Instrument function. Each aircraft type and model has a defined maximum operating limit speed curve or curves which are a part of the airframe manufacturer's type certification approval data; this limit speed data shall be available from the subject airframe manufacturer as published in the operating manual for the aircraft m e  
and model number and configuration. 

3
.
 GENERAL STANDARDS 
3
.
1
 
Compatibility of Components: If components of the eqitipment require matching to meet the requirements of this standard, they shall be identified in a **manner** which will assure proper matching. Instaliation instructions issued by the Over Speed Warning Instrument manufacturer shall 
indicate matching requirements if any. 
3
.
2
 
Accessibility of Controls: Controls which are not normally adjustable in flight shall not be readily 
accessible to flight personnel when the instrument is installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
3
.
3
 
Interchangeability: Instruments which are identified with the same manufacturer's part or model 
number shall be compleíx4y interchangeable. 

## 3 . 4 Over Speed Warning Circuit:

3
.
4
.
1
 
The electrical circuit shall be such that should the aircraft exceed the defined maximum operating 
speed, the internal circuit shall provide for a signai which shall operate an 
aural warning device. 
3
.
4
.
2
 
The electrical circuit **shall** be designed so that no signal shall be present to operate the aural 
warning device **for** speeds below the maximum operating speed range and a signal shall be present 
upon attaining the maximum operating speed and shall remain on above the maximum operating 
speed. 
 

3
.
5
 Self-Test Provision: The instrument shall have test capabilities to confirm the operation of the electricd output signal to the aural warning device. 

## 3 . 6 Maximum Speed Signal Accuracy:

3
.
6
.
1
 The instrument shall generate and maintain its output signal when the maximum operating speed is 
achieved or exceeded, and shall operate to the following tolerance relative to that maximum operating 
speed curve. The output signal shall be removed when the speed falls below the maximum operating 
speed curve to the same tolerance, 
a) For curve sections based on airspeed in knots, Calibrated or equivalent, O to plus G knots 
(11 
km/hr) in excess of the limit speed value. 
b) 
Por curve sections based on Mach Number, O to plus , 
O10 
Mach in excess of the limit 
Mach number value, 
3
.
 
G .  2 The above tolerances are applicable for a minimum environmental temperature range of +20" 
C 
through +55" 
C 
(+68" 
F through 1131" 
F) and in the mounting position defined in the manufacturer's 
installation ins 
tructions. 
3
.
6
.
3
 
For environmental temperatures fram c20" to -30°C 
from 155°C 
to +71"C 
the tolerance of the output 
signal shall not exceed: 
a) 
Por curve sections based on airspeed in knots, calibrated or equivalent, O to plus 8 knots 
(15 
km/hr) of the maximum speed value. 
b) For curve section based on Mach number, O to plus O. O15 
Mach of the maximum Mach number 
value. 
3
.
6
.
4
 
In those cases where the Over Speed Warning Instrument function is part of an air speed or an air 
speed/Mach number indicator, the performance specified in 3
.
6
.
1
,
 3
.
6
.
2
,
 and 3
.
6
.
3
 shall be applied 
to the indicated air speed or Mach number displayed relative to the maximum speed displayed by the 
instrument, The performance tolerances specified in 3
.
6
.
1
,
 3
.
6
.
2
,
 and 3
.
6
.
3
 shall not be exceeded 
relative to the maximum operating speed curve for the instrument. 

## 3 . 7 Operating Range:

3
,
7
.
1
 The altitude range for all Over Speed Warning Instruments shall start at -1000 
ft (-305 
m) pressure 
altitude and the upper pressure altitude limit shall be applicable to the aircraft and shall be indicated 
on the nameplate. 
3.7.2 
The working airspeed range shall start at least 30 knots (
5
5
.
5
6
 km/hr) below the lowest airspeed 
value defined in the maximum operating speed curve, and shall extend at least 50 
knots (93 
km/hr) 
above the highest airspeed value defined in the maximum operating speed curve. 
3
.
8
 Aircraft Identification: The aircraft t
y
p
e
,
 
model number, and configuration for which the Over Speed 
Warning instrument has been calibrated and for which it performs its intended function, shall be clearly 
marked on the instrument nameplate and in the manufacturer's installation instructions. Each aircraft 
type, model and configuration has a defined maximum operating limit speed curve. 

## 3 . 9 Power Loss:

3
.
9
.
1
 
I
f
 electrical power is used as the means to operate any portion of the Over Speed Warning Instrument, 
provisions shail be incorporated in the instrument to detect the loss of this power. An indication of 
the loss of electrical operating power shall be provided in a positive manner. An output signal equivalent to a maximum speed limit warning is one acceptable means of indicating the loss of power. 
--`,,```````,`,,`,``,``,,,,`,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---

 
3.9.2 Power loss 
to the instrument from an external source, e.g. aural warning power, shall not require 
a power loss signal from the instrument as in 3.9.1. 
3.10 Fire Hazard: Except for small parts (such as hobs, fasteners, seals, grommets, and small electrical 
parts) that would not contribute significantly to the propagation of a fire, all materials used must be 
self-extinguishing when tested in accordance with the requirements of Federal Aviation Regulation 
25.1359 (d) and Appendix !IFTf 
thereto, with the exception that materials tested may be configured in 
accordance with paragraph (b) of Appendix 'Ttf 
or may be configured as used. 
4. 
PERFORMANCE UNDER STANDARD CONDITIONS 
4.1 
Standard Atmospheric Conditions: Unless otherwise specified herein, all tests shall be conducted at 
atmospheric conditions specified in paragraph 3.4 of DO-160. 
(Environmental Conditions and Test 
Procedures for Airborne Electronics/Electrical Equipment and Instruments, dated Feb. 28, 1975). 
4.2 
Attitude: Unless otherwise specified herein, all tests shall be conducted with the instrument in its normal 
operating position as defined in the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
4.3 
Power Conditions: Unless otherwise specified herein, all individual performance tests shall be conducted 
at the power ratings defined by the manufacturer in the installation instructions for the instrument. 
4.4 
Vibration to Minimize Friction: 
4.4.1 Reciprocating Engine Powered Aircraft: Unless otherwise specified, tests shall be conducted with the 
equipment subjected to a maximum vibration of 0.005 in. (0.127 mm) total excursion at any frequency 
from 20 to 35 Hertz, provided the equipment is mounted in its noimal operating pasition. 
4.4.2 Turbine Powered Aircraft: Unless otherwise specified, tests shall be conducted with the equipment 
subjected to a maximum vibration of O. O01 in. (
O
.
 025 mm) total excursion at any frequency from 10 to 
60 Hertz, provided the equipment is mounted in its normal operating position. 
NOTE: If vibration exceeding the values specified above is required during normal 
operation in order to meet the accuracy requirements specified in this 
performance standard, it shall be the responsibility of the equipment manufacturer to either provide such vibration internally to the equipment or 
notify the user that such vibration is required to be applied to the equipment, 
when installed in an aircraft. 
4.5 
Per€ormance Tests: The instrument shall be tested to demonstrate compliance with 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.9 
of this standard. 
4.5.1 
The performance tests specified shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements specified by 
the manufacturer, and at least three test points in each maximum allowable speed curve section shall 
be included to assure conformance to the curve sections. When the curve contains reversal in direction, e. g., airspeed transition to Mach No., the reversal point shall be tested to assure that the 
transition occurs at the correct altitude level. 
4.6 
Balance Error (Attitudel: If the instrument is subjected to Balance Error (Mechanical balance), the 
instrument shall be tested in the following positions, and the performance as specified in 4.6.1 and 
4.6.1.1, 
shaU be met. 
Normal operating position (as specified by the instrument manufacturer) 
1) 
Instrument rotated clockwise around its X (longitudinal) axis, 
90" from its normal position. 
2) 
--`,,```````,`,,`,``,``,,,,`,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
Instrument rotated clocks&e around its X 
(longitudinal) axis, 180" from its normal position. 
3) 
4
.
6
 
Continued 
4) instrument rotated counter clockwise around its X (longitudinal) axis, 90" 
from its normal 
position. 
5) instrument rotated about its Y (lateral) 
axis, 90" 
up from its normal operating position. 
6) instrument rotated about its Y (lateral) axis, 90" 
down from its normaï operating position. 
4.6.1 With a 
static pressure of 
approximately 12 
in. of mercury absolute (305 
mm) approximately 23,000 
f t  
(7,000 m), applied to the static port and a differential pressure, approximately ,015 
Mach above the 
maxlmum'operating speed of the curve, applied to the total pressure port, the instrument shall have 
generated an 
output signal. This signal shall be maintained for the attitudes defined in 4
.
6
 while the 
instrument is being lightly vibrated. 
4
.
6
.
1
.
1
 
For aircraft with maximum operating speed curves not related to Mach number and for aircraft 
altitude limitations below 20,000 
f t  
(6,100 m) the applied static pressure should be 80% 
of the altitude limit for the aircraft and the differentid pressure applied shdl be 10 
knots (18.5 
km/hr) above 
the maximum speed limitation as defined by the maximum operating speed curve for the aircraft 
at the test altitude. The instrument shall have generated an output signal. This signal shall be 
maintained for the attitudes defined in 4
.
6
.
1
 while the instrument is being lightly vibrated. 
4
.
7
 Electrical Insulation: 
4
.
7
.
1
 Insulation Resistance: The Insulation Resistance measured at 200 
VDC for five seconds between all 
ungrounded electrical connector terminals connected together and the instrument case (metallic) shall 
not be less than 5 megaohms. 
4
.
7
.
2
 
Overpotential: The instrument shall not be damaged by the application of a test potential between 
isolated electrical circuits and the metallic case. The test potential shall be a sinusoidal voltage of 
commercial frequency with an R. M. S. vaiue of five times the maximum voltage defined for the instrument, not to exceed 500 
volts. For instruments which are hermetically sealed, the voltage shall not 
exceed **200** volts. 
4
.
7
.
2
.
1
 
The potential shall start 
from zero and be increased at a uniform rate to its test value. It shali be 
maintained at this value for five seconds, and then reduced at a ungorm 
rate to zero. 
--`,,```````,`,,`,``,``,,,,`,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
4
.
7
.
3
 Limitations: The above tests are to insure adequate isolation and insulation and are not to be applied 
to elements such as windings, resistors, capacitors, semi-conductors, etc. Circuits which contain 
solid state 
components are not to be subjected to overpotential testing. 
4
.
7
.
3
.
1
 
Circuits that operate at potentials below 30 
volts are not to be subjected to overpotential tests. 
4.8 
Case Overpressure (Externair: A 
pressure of 26 in. (660 
mm) mercury differential (Gage) shall be 
applied to the case (exterior) for 5 min. with the pressure **ports** vented to ambient pressure. No damage o r  deformation shaíl result, nor shall 
the instrument fail to meet the performance requirements 
apecified in 4
.
5
,
 4
.
9
,
 4
.
1
0
.
 
4
.
9
 
Case Leakage: A 
total 
volume of 25 
(0.41 
L) 
within the pressure system (case volume lines and 
other ecjpipment), shall be implemented and thermal equilibrium shall be maintained for these tests. 
4
.
9
.
1
 
Static Pressure (With the static and total 
pressure ports tied together): The external pressure surrounding the case shall be approximately **29.921** in. (760 
mm) of mercury absolute (sea 
level). Apply 
12 
in. (304 
mm) of mercury absolute to the pressure **ports.** The change in pressure at the static 
connection shall not exceed **.O20** in. (O. 5 
mm) of mercury per minute. The aame test shall be done 
by applying 38 
in. (965 
mm) of mercury absolute to the ports and the same leak rate shaïl apply. 
 

4.9.2 
Total Pressure (With the static port vented to ambient static pressure): A pressure equal to the maximum differential pressure plus the maximum static pressure that the instrument will be exposed to for 
the maximum operating speed curve applicable to subject aircraft shall be applied to the total pressure 
port. With the total pressure source closed off, there shall be no 
indication of leakage on the total 
pressure side after a one minute period. 
4.10 Output Signal Generation: For a period of not less than 1 
hr the instrument shall not have been exposed 
to pressures other than ambient (sea 
level). The instrument shall be tested at sufficient altitude levels, 
but not at intervals greater than approximately 5,000 ft (1524 m); and at appropriate airspeed values to 
adequagly represent the maximum operating speed curve **for** the subject aircraft, as defined below. 
4.10.1 
For MOS curve sections based on 
air speed, at each specified altitude level the applied static pressure 
shall be held constant and the applied differential pressure varied. First by slowly increasing the 
differential pressure (airspeed) until an 
output signal is generated. The output signal shall be generated within the requirements of 3.6.1 (a) or 3.6.1 (b) 
as applicable. Then the airspeed shall be 
increased by 20 knots (37 km/hr) and the signal shall remain o
n
.
 The differential pressure shall then 
be slowly decreased until the warning signal just goes off. The output signal shall have gone off for 
values below the nominal maximum speed as defined by the maximum operating limit speed curve. 
4.10.2 
For selected values of maximum operating Mach number and altitude, the altitude level shall be held 
constant and the differential pressure shall be increased until an output signal has just been generated. 
The differential pressure shall be readjusted so that the output signal just goes off and the differential 
pressure shall now be held at that point. T
h
e
 
altitude level shall then be increased (pressure lowered) 
until the output signal just comes **on.** The requirements of 3.6.1 (b) shaU be met, The altitude level 
shall then be lowered (pressure increased) until the output signal just goes off. The output signal 
shall have remained on **for** the performance as defined by 3.6.1 (b). 

## 5. Performance Standard Under Environmental Conbitions

5.1 
When the Over Speed Warning Instrument forms part of an aircraft system, such as an Air Data Computer, the Over Speed Warning function shall meet the performance requirement specified in Sections 3 
and 4 herein for the environmental conditions specified for that aircraft system. 
5.1.1 When the Over Speed Warning Instrument is independent of any aircraft system, the manufacturer shail 
define the exact. environmental conditions and/or categories of R. T. C. A. DO-160 Appendix 
under 
which the equipment will perform to the requirements of this standard. The applicable environmental 
condition and categories shail be specified in the manufacturer's installation instructions or on 
the 
equipment nameplate. 
5.1.2 
Unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer, the measurement procedures applicable to a determination of the performance of the instrument under environmental conditions shall be as 
set forth in 
R. T
.
 
C. A., Document DO-160, entitled llEnvironrnental Conditions and Test Procedures for Airborne 
Electronic/Electrical Equipment and Instruments, dated 28 February 1975. 
5.2 
Environmental Categories: The environmental categories appropriate to the installation o
f
 this instrument in' 
the individual airframe shall be defined by the manufacturer in the installation instructions and/or 
as marked on 
the instrument in accordance with R. T. C.A. , 
DO-160, Appendix "A" as applicable, and 
shall be the environmental categories to which the instrument shall have been tested and approved t
o
.
 
Environmenhl conditions and categories which M e r  
from those defined in Appendix "A1' of DO-160 
shall be clearly defined in the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
5.2.1 
Performance tests which are required after subjection to test environments may be conducted after 
exposure to several environmentd conditions. 
5.2.2 
The equipment shall be subjected to the specified environmental conditions as per the procedures defined in R.T. C.A., 
DO-160, and shall not be damaged by being subjected to these environmental tests. 
--`,,```````,`,,`,``,``,,,,`,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`--- 

[
i
,
 2
.
3
 The following list of environmental test categories and conditions are considered as the minimum test 
requirements: 
Temperature/Altitude Tests (DO-160 applicable categories, paragraph section 4. O). 
a) 
Temperature Variation Tests (DO-160, paragraph section 5. O). 
b) 
c) Humidity Test (DO-160, paragraph section 6. O). 
d) 
Shock Tests (DO-160, paragraph section 7. O). 
e) Vibration Tests (DO-160 Applicable categories, paragraph section 8. O). 
f) 
Magnetic Effect (DO-160 applicable class, paragraph section 15. O). 
g) Power input Test (DO-160 applicable categories, paragraph section 16. O). 
h) 
Voltage Spare Conducted Test (DO-160 applicable categories, paragraph section 17. O). 
i) Audio Frequency Conducted susceptibility Test (DO-160, paragraph section 18. O). 
j) 
Induced Signai Susceptibility Test (DO-160, applicable categories, paragraph section 19. O). 
ir) 
Decompression (DO-160, paragraph section 4.6.2). 
 