
## Adoption Notice

SAE-AMs-H-6088, "Heat Treatment of Aluminum Alloys", was adopted on September 26, 
1997, for use by the Department of Defense (DoD). Proposed changes by DoD activities must be 
submitted to the DoD Adopting Activity: Commander, Naval Air Warfare Center Aircraft 
Division, Code 414100B 
                     120-3, Highway 547, Lakehurst, NJ 08733-5 
                                                             100. DoD activities may 
obtain copies of this standard from the DODSSP, Standardization 
                                                          Document Order Desk, 700 
Robbins Avenue, Building 4D, Philadelphia, PA 191 
                                               1 
                                                1-5094. The private sector and other 
government agencies may purchase copies from SAE, 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, 
PA 15096. 

SAE-AMs-H-6088 should be used instead of MIL-H-6088, which was canceled on September 
26, 1997. 

Air Force - 11 
Army - MR 
(Project 95GP-04 
16) 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          

DISTRIBUTION 
            STATEMENT 
                      A. Approved for public release; distribution 
                                                      .is 
                                                       unlimited. 

# Aerospace Material

JUL 1997 
~ 
~~ 
SPECIFICATION 
400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096-0001 

# Submitted For Recognition As An American National Standard

## Heat Treatment Of Aluminum Alloys Notice

This document has been taken directly from Military Specification MlL-H-6088G, Amendment 1, and contains only minor editorial and format changes required to bring it into conformance with the publishing requirements of **SAE** technical standards. 

The original military specification was adopted as an CAE standard under the provisions of the SAE 
Technical Standards Board (TSB) Rules and Regulations (TSB 001 
) pertaining to accelerated adoption of government specifications and standards. TSB rules provide for (a) the publication of portions of unrevised government specifications and standards without consensus voting at the SAE Committee level, (b) the use of the existing government specification or standard format, and (c) the exclusion of any qualified product list (QPL) sections. 

## Scope And Application: 1.

This specification covers the requirements and recommendations for the heat treatment of aluminum alloy rolled, extruded, forged, drawn, and cast product (See 6.1 and 6.5.1). It does not cover the requirements for the heat treatment of aluminum alloy parts (See 3.4). Subjects covered are: process establishment and re-establishment (previously called "process qualification" 
and "process requalification"); 
periodic process surveys; periodic product monitoring; furnaces and operation controls; pyrometric equipment; quenching equipment, media, and operation controls; parameters and procedures for solution heat treatment, quenching, age hardening, and annealing *(of* certain product); 
requirements for inspections and record keeping; test methods: and limits of product acceptability. 

## 2. Applicable Documents:

The following publications form a part of this specification to the extent specified herein. The applicable issue of these publications shall be those in effect on date of invitation for bids or solicitation for offers. 

FAX: (412) 776-0790 
                                                                                

U.S. Government Publications: 
2.1 
Available from DODSSP, Subscription Services Desk, Building 
4D, 700 Robbins Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 191 
1 
1-5094. 

MIL-STD-1537 
Electrical Conductivity Test for Measurement of Heat Treatment of Aluminum 
Alloys, Eddy Current Method 
MIL-STD-45662 Calibration Systems Requirements 

2.2 
SAE Publications: 
Available from SAE, 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096-0001. 

AMS 2750 
Pyrometry AMS 2770 
Heat Treatment of Wrought Aluminum Alloy Parts 

2.3 
ASTM Publications: 
                                                                                          
Available from ASTM, 1 
O0 
Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959. 

ASTM B 557 
ASTM E 10 
ASTM E 18 
ASTM E 103 
Tension Testing Wrought and Cast Aluminum and Magnesium 
Alloy Products 
Brinell Hardness of Metallic Materials 
Rockwell Hardness and Rockwell Superficial Hardness of Metallic Materials 
Rapid Indentation 
Hardness 
Testing of Metallic Materials 

                                                                                          

## Ansi Publications:

2.4 
Available from ANSI, 11 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036-8002. 

ANSI H35.1 
Alloy and Temper Designation System for Aluminum 

## 3. Requirements:

3.1 
Process Establishment: 
Prior to production, fully capable heat-treating equipment and procedures shall be in place and established as specified herein (See Table I). The Government reserves the right of review, verification, and approval of the results of process establishment or re-establishment derived from testing new equipment and equipment which has undergone major work or repair (See 3.1.2). 

3.1.1 
Notification of Authorized Government Representative: When an authorized government 
representative 
(See 6.5.6) 
finds it necessary to witness the process establishment tests, the 
representative 
shall be given at least 7 days notice prior to such tests. All process information 
shall 
be considered proprietary 
to the heat transfer, and its confidentiality 
shall be preserved. 
 

3.1.2 
Conditions Requiring Process Re-Establishment: Occurrence of one or more of the following 
events necessitates re-establishment 
of the equipment or procedures involved: 
3.1.2.1 
Replacement of, extensive deterioration of, major damage to, or modifications to the previously 
accepted heat-treavquench equipment that might result in non-conformance (See 3.5.1 through 
3.5.5 as applicable). 
                                                                                          
3.1.2.2 
Failure of existing equipment or standard heat-treating procedures to consistently produce 
product meeting the quality requirements specified herein (See 4.6.4). 
3.1 2.3 Any noncompliance (See 4.1.3 and 4
.
6
.
4
)
 
detected during periodic process surveys (See 3.2) or 
periodic product 
monitoring (See 3.3). 
3.2 
Periodic Process Surveys: 
Heat-treating equipment and procedures shall be surveyed as specified in Table I. 

## 3.3 Periodic Product Monitoring:

Products shall be tested to monitor the operational characteristics of the heat-treating equipment and procedures as specified in Table I. 

## 3.4 Heat Treatment Of Parts:

Finished or semi-finished parts made from wrought mill products shall be heat treated in accordance with AMS 
2770. Raw castings, finished or rough machined parts made from castings, and deep drawn shells shall be heat treated in accordance with the applicable requirements herein. 

## 3.5 Equipment:

3.5.1 
Furnaces: Any type of furnace i
s
 acceptable for the heat treating of aluminum alloys, provided the 
product is not deleteriously affected. Unless otherwise indicated herein, the term "air", with 
reference to a heating medium, shall apply equally to combusted gases and protective 
atmospheres. The use of torch-heating equipment is prohibited. 
3.5.1.1 Air Chamber Furnaces: Air chamber furnaces in which the products of combustion come in 
contact with the metal may be used for the heat treatment of those products 
which have been 
demonstrated by test to be free from porosity resulting from solution heat treatment (See 6.3.3.2 
and 6.5.5) in the furnace of concern. 
3.5.1.2 
Salt Baths: l h e  
salt shall not react with the alloys being 
treated. Nitrate salt baths shall not be 
used to heat treat **5XX.X** casting alloys (See 6.3.1). 
 

3.5.1.3 
Alternate Apparatus for Age-Hardening 
Treatment: Other apparatus for age-hardening heat 
treatment may be used, provided it meets all requirements specified herein and the material 
meets the material 
specification requirements, and is not damaged. 
3.5.1.4 
Furnace Temperature Uniformity 
Surveys: Surveys shall be as specified in AMS 2750. 
3.5.1.5 
Temperature Uniformity: 
3.5.1 
5.1 
Batch Furnaces 
and Salt Baths: The design and construction 
of batch furnaces and baths shall 
be such that, during the heating and soaking period, the temperature of the heating medium at 
any point in the heating or soaking zone is controlled 
such that the metal temperature does not 
exceed the maximum of the soaking temperature range specified in 3.6.1 or the selected agehardening temperature range (See 3.9) applicable 
to the alloy being solution heat treated or 
aged. After all of the fumace charge reaches the minimum of the applicable 
temperature range 
specified, the maximum temperature variation of the heating medium and furnace charge 
within this zone shall be 20 O F  
(or less when Table II 
or VI1 requires), with the exception of alloy 
6061 for which a variation of 30 O F  
is permissible (See Table II, 
footnote 5 and Table VII, 
footnote 4). 
3.5.1 5.2 
Continuous Furnaces: For continuous furnaces, the soaking zone follows the heating zone, 
and it is in 
the soaking zone that metal temperatures shall be within the heat-treating 
temperature ranges specified in 3.6.1 or the selected age-hardening 
temperature range (See 
3.9), as applicable. After all of the furnace charge within the soaking zone reaches the 
minimum of the applicable temperature range specified, the maximum temperature 
variation of 
the heating medium and furnace charge in the soaking zone shall be 20 O
F
 (or less when Table 
II or VI1 requires) with the exception of alloy 6061 for which a variation of 30 O
F
 is permissible 
(See Table II, 
footnote 5 and Table **VII,** footnote 4). 
3.5.2 
Pyrometric Equipment: Properly arranged temperature-control and recording devices shall be 
provided 
on all heat-treating 
equipment 
to ensure control of temperature to the requirements 
of this 
specification and AMs 2750 in all heating and soaking zones. 
3.5.2.1 
Temperature Control and Recording Equipment: Instruments shall meet the requirements 
of 
AMS 2750 except that the recordings of the working instruments required by AMS 2750 may be 
stored on computerized magnetic storage media. If stored this way, a hard copy of the 
recordings shall be available upon request. The exact location of sensors shall be governed by 
furnace or bath configurations and dimensions in accordance with AMS 2750, and they shall be 
in such locations 
as to give accurate measurement o
f
 the workpiece and heating medium 
temperatures. 
3.5.2.2 
Accuracy: The furnace pyrometric system shall be set to control at working temperatures applied 
in practice and the accuracy of the system shall be monitored according to AMS 2750. 

                                                                                          
                                                                                          

 
                                                                                

3.5.3 
Quenching Equipment and Media: Suitable equipment for water, air, aqueous polymer solution, 
liquified gas, or oil quenching shall be provided. 
3
.
5
.
3
.
1
 Quench Baths: Quench baths 
shall permit complete immersion of material and shall be of 
sufficient size to extract the heat from the most massive load anticipated to be quenched. 
3.5.3. 
Circulation: The quench bath shall contain a circulation system (either internal 
or external) to 
provide 
for the flow of quench medium through the heat-treat load. In lieu of bath circulation, 
product may be agitated if 
movement is sufficient 
to ensure that quench uniformity is obtained 
and all requirements are met. This shall be verified by monitoring in accordance with 4.4.2. 
3.5.3. 
Air Agitation: Air agitation of the quench bath is permitted, if it is demonstrated that quench 
uniformity is obtained. This shall be verified by monitoring in accordance with 4.4.2. 
3.5.3.1.3 
                                                                                          
Heating and Cooling: The quench bath shall be provided with sufficient heating and/or cooling capacity needed to maintain the temperature of the quenching medium within the ranges specified in 3.7, as applicable, and instrumentation necessary to ensure adequate temperature control. The instrumentation shall be capable of reading within 1
5
 
O
F
 
of true temperature. 

3.5.3.1.4 
Speed of Immersion: The quench system shall have the means to control the speed at which 
solution heat treated parts enter the quench medium, if such control is part of the required heattreating procedure. The allowable quench delay (See 3.7.4) shall not be exceeded. 
3.5.3.1.5 
Inflow and Draining: All water baths, except aqueous polymer solutions, employed in 
quenching products which have been heated in salt bath furnaces shall be maintained such 
that no visible salt residue is observed on the surface of the products after drying. Wateraqueous polymer solutions shall at all times when in use contain no salt concentrations in 
excess of 6.0 percent 
by weight. 
3
.
5
.
3
.
2
 Spray-Quenching Equipment: When a spray system is employed for quenching, the discharge of 
the coolant from the nozzles shall be of sufficient volume, pressure, and temperature to ensure 
that a uniform and satisfactory quench is achieved on all products. For plate and extrusions, this 
shall be verified 
by monitoring in accordance with 4.4.1. Calibrated recording instrumentation 
shall be provided to monitor spray quench variables. 
3.5.3.3 
Location 
of Quenching Equipment: Quenching equipment and handling 
facilities shall be located 
such that the delay in quenching does not exceed the maximum delay times specified in Table 
VI, as applicable. 
3.5.4 Rinsing Equipment: Rinse tanks, sprays, or other suitable apparatus shall be employed as 
necessary to ensure that no salt residues or films remain on metal surfaces after drying. 
 
                                                                                

3.5.5 
Construction 
of Support Racks, Fixtures, and Other Workpiece Holders: Support racks shall be so 
constructed as to minimize shifting or movement of the metal during the heat treatment and 
quenching operations. The racks, fixtures, trays, or baskets shall be constructed so that no 
deleterious effect on the products being processed will arise from solution heat treating or 
quenching. 
3.5.6 
Testing Equipment: The electrical conductivity tester shall be calibrated in accordance with the 
procedures outlined in 4.5.5.2. 
3.5.7 
Calibration: Calibration of all equipment shall be in accordance with MIL-STD-45662 
and 
AMS 2750, as applicable. 

## 3.6 Parameters And Procedures For Solution Heat Treatment:

3.6.1 
Solution Heat Treatment of Mill and Foundry Products: Aluminum alloy wrought products and 
castings shall be solution heat treated within the applicable metal temperature ranges specified in 
Table II. 
3.6.2 
Re-Solution 
Heat Treatment: A solution heat treatment of an aluminum alloy workpiece which has 
previously been solution heat treated shall be considered a re-solution heat treatment. 
Accordingly, the first solution heat treatment of an alloy following purchase 
as solution heat treated 
or solution heat treated and aged shall be considered a re-solution heat treatment. Annealing and 
age-hardening heat treatments shall not be considered re-solution heat treatments. Alclad 
products of the **2XXX** and **7XXX** series alloys shall not be re-solution heat treated more than the 
number of times specified in Table 111 (See 6.3.3.5). 
3.6.3 
Heat-Treating 
Operations: Heat-treating 
operations shall be performed on the whole workpiece, 
never on a portion 
only, and shall be applied in 
a manner that will produce uniform properties 
within 
the limitations of material configuration. 
3.6.3.1 
Heat Treating Alclad Sheet: When solution heat treating alclad sheet, the size and spacing of the 
load shall permit 
the entire load to come to the specified 
temperature range within 30 minutes for 
thicknesses up to 0.050 inch, 60 minutes for 0.050 or greater but less than 0.1 
02 inch, and 
120 minutes for 0.102 or greater. When a furnace charge consists of a group of alciad alloy 
workpieces of varying thickness, the heat-up time for the charge shall be the limit specified for 
the thinnest work piece or section of a work piece (See 6.3.3.3). 
3.6.4 Cleanliness: Surfaces of metal shall be free from lubricants 
or other matter deleterious to the 
aluminum alloy being heat treated. Substances 
on the surface 
which, after solution heat treatment, 
affect appearance only shall not be cause for disapproval of the production procedure nor rejection 
of the workpieces so affected. 
                                                                                          


3.6.5 
Charge Preparation and Limitation: Aluminum alloys being heat treated shall be so supported as to 
permit access of the heating medium to uniformly heat the alloy to the required temperature. 
Except as noted below, furnaces shall not be charged following a downward temperature setting 
until all instruments indicate that the furnace has reached the range in Table II encompassing the 
new lower temperature. If the furnace has automatic controls that ensure that the reduction 
in 
furnace temperature is attained prior to any metal in the charge reaching the soak temperature, 
furnace charging may take place at any time. 
3.6.6 
Soaking Time: After the charge has reached the required solution heat-treating temperature range, 
it shall be held (soaked) within that temperature range for a period necessary to ensure the 
maximum possible 
solution of alloying elements and development o
f
 specified properties 
upon 
aging. In a continuous furnace, the speed of any product passing through the working zone 
(See 6.5.3) shall be such that soaking time shall yield product capable of being aged to 
requirements of the applicable product specification. Recommended soaking times are listed in 
Tables IV and V. When a charge includes sections of various thicknesses, the recommended 
soaking time shall be determined by the section having the greatest thickness (See 6.3.3.1). 

## 3.7 Quenching Parameters And Procedures:

3.7.1 
Quenching Wrought Nonforged Product: Parameters and procedures for quenching wrought alloy product (except forgings) of 2XXX and 7XXX series alloys shall be as specified in 3.7.1.1 and 
3.7.1.2. 
3.7.1.1 
Total Immersion in Water Baths or Aqueous Polymer Solutions: When a water bath is used, the 
volume and circulation of the bath shall be such that its temperature shall be no higher than 
100" F at the time of completion of the quench. When an aqueous polymer solution is used, the 
volume and circulation 
of solution shall be such that the bath temperature at no time exceeds 130 
OF. Quenching delays and duration of quenchant contact shall be as specified in 3.7.4 and 3.7.5, 
respectively. Quenched product shall, after age-hardening to tempers specified in 
the acquisition 
documents, satisfy the applicable property requirements and, when tested, pass the corrosion 
test in 4.5.3. Test programs to determine compliance with these requirements shall conform to 
Table VIII, as applicable. 
3.7.1.2 
                                                                                          
Quenching in Liquified Gas, Airblast, and Water Spray: Quenching by total immersion in liquified gas or by contact with high-pressure, high-volume jets of water, or air within a suitable chamber is permissible provided that quenched product is capable of passing the corrosion test in 4.5.3, and of being age-hardened to mechanical properties and other characteristics conforming to applicable specified requirements. Quenching delays and duration of quenchant contact shall be as specified in 3.7.4 and 3.7.5, respectively. Test programs to determine compliance with these requirements shall conform to Table VIII, as applicable. 

                                                                                          

 
                                                                                

3.7.2 
Quenching Forgings: Except 
as specified 
in 
3.7.2.1,3.7.2.2, or 3.7.2.3, forgings may be cold water, 
hot water, or aqueous polymer quenched provided 
that resultant 
product is capable of passing the 
applicable 
tests and satisfying 
all applicable specified requirements after age-hardening 
to tempers 
specified in the acquisition documents. Test programs to determine compliance 
with these 
requirements shall conform to Table VIII, as applicable. 
3.7.2.1 
Quenching 2014 and 2024 Forgings: Unless otherwise specified in a drawing or procurement 
document, forgings of 2014 and 2024 shall be quenched by total immersion in water heated to 
140 
to 180 
O F .  
3.7.2.2 
Quenching 2XXX and 7XXX Forgings Other Than 2014 and 2024: Forgings of these alloys shall be quenched by total immersion in water heated to 140 
to 160 O
F
 unless quenchants other than 
hot water are necessary 
to achieve required properties or to minimize residual tensile stresses 
and/or distortion (See 6.8). 
3.7.2.3 
-T41 and -T61 Tempers: Unless otherwise specified in a drawing or procurement 
document, 
forgings and impact extrusions for heat treatment to the -T41 and -T61 tempers shall be 
quenched by total immersion in boiling 
water. 
3.7.3 
Quenching Castings: Castings may be oil, water (See 3.7.3.2), or aqueous polymer quenched 
provided 
that the resultant product is capable of passing 
the applicable tests and satisfying all 
applicable specified requirements after age-hardening to tempers specified in the acquisition 
documents. Air quenching is satisfactory for continuously quenching thin sections if all specified 
property requirements 
are met. Test programs to determine compliance with these requirements 
shall conform to Table VIII, as applicable. 
3.7.3.1 
Quenching Castings of Alloys 520.0 and 242.0: Unless otherwise specified in a drawing or 
procurement document, castings of Alloy 520.0 (formerly designated 220) shall be quenched by 
total immersion 
in oil heated to 300 O F  
and castings of Alloy 242.0 (formerly 
designated 142) shall 
be air-quenched. 
3.7.3.2 Water Quenched Castings: Such castings shall be quenched by total immersion in a water bath 
heated from 150 to 212 O
F
 unless other quenching temperatures are approved by the procuring 
activity. 
3.7.4 
Quench Delay: Maximum allowable delays before immersion quenching product shall comply with 
Table VI, as applicable to section thickness. Allowable delays before quenching using an 
alternative to immersion, shall be determined by corrosion tests (See 4.5.3) and/or mechanical 
property tests on product age-hardened 
to tempers within the scope of the applicable material 
specification and specified in the acquisition 
documents. 
                                                                                          
 
                                                                                

3.7.5 Duration of Contact Between Quenchant and Workpiece: Workpieces quenched by immersion 
shall remain in the quenchant 
for not less 
than 2 minutes per inch of thickness, or fraction thereof in 
the thickest section. Alternatively, workpieces shall be kept immersed in 
the quenchant for not less 
than 2 minutes after boiling ceases. Workpieces quenched by spray shall remain in contact with 
the spray until steam no longer rises from the workpiece surface. Workpieces quenched in an air 
blast shall remain in contact with that quenchant until surface temperatures of the workpiece are 
reduced to **212** O
F
.
 
3.8 Racking and Spacing: 
I 
Product shall be racked or supported and spaced to permit free access of the heating and/or quenching medium to all surfaces of the product in all portions of the load. Adequacy of heating and quenching procedures shall be documented by accumulation of adequate data to demonstrate conformance to applicable material specifications. When immersion quenching, see **4.4.2.1** and 
4.4.2.3. 

3.8.1 Racking and Spacing of Forgings and Castings: Forgings and castings, except as specified in 
3.8.1.2, shall be separated from each other by a distance greater than the thickest section, or as 
provided by special racking procedures which demonstrate that the specific product receives an 
adequate heating or quench. 
3.8.1.1 Fixtures: Fixtures shall be designed so as to have a minimum effect on the heating rate and the 
quench rate. Orientation shall be such as to avoid entrapment of steam, allow free circulation 
of 
quenchant, and to preclude steam from harmfully degrading the quench. The size of the load 
shall be limited 
so as to produce no more than a 20°F 
rise in water temperature, or a **25°F** rise in 
aqueous polymer temperature as a result of quenching. Exceptions to the temperature rise are 
acceptable, if the product has been demonstrated by testing and documentation to meet the 
requirements of the applicable material specification. 
                                                                                          
3.8.1.2 Random Racking: Random racking or layering of forgings or castings, 1 
.O inch or **less** in 
thickness, is permitted to a maximum thickness of **3.0** inches, with a minimum spacing of 
3.0 inches between layers, provided that quenching is performed by immersion. Exceptions to 
this method are acceptable, if the product meets the requirements of the applicable 
material 
specification. Records shall be kept of the test results of the product so racked. 
3.9 Recommended 
Age-Hardening Heat Treatments: 
The recommended time-temperature cycles shown in Table **VI1** are typical for various forms, sizes, and methods of manufacture, and may not exactly describe the optimum treatments for specific products. 

                                                                                          

 

## 4. Quality Assurance Provisions: 4.1 Responsibility For Inspection:

Unless otherwise specified in the contract or purchase order, the contractor is responsible for the performance of all inspection requirements (examinations and tests) as specified herein. Except as otherwise specified in the contract or purchase order, the contractor may use his own or any other facilities suitable for the performance of the inspection requirements specified herein, unless disapproved by the procuring activity. The procuring activity reserves the right to perform any of the inspections set forth in this specification where such inspections are deemed necessary to ensure that supplies and services conform to prescribed requirements. 

4.1.1 Responsibility 
for Compliance: **All** items shall meet all requirements of section 3. The inspection 
set forth in this specification shall become a part of the contractor's overall inspection system or 
quality program. The absence of any inspection requirements in the specification shall not relieve 
the contractor of the responsibility of ensuring that all products or supplies submitted to the 
procuring 
activity 
for acceptance comply with all requirements of the contract. Sampling 
inspection, as part of manufacturing 
operations, is an acceptable practice to ascertain 
conformance to requirements, however, this does not authorize submission of known defective 
material, either indicated or actual, nor does it commit the procuring activity to accept defective 
material. 
4.1.2 Retention of Inspection Records: Inspection 
records, unless 
otherwise specified herein, shall be on 
file and available for review for four years after the date of inspection. 
4.1.2.1 
Process Establishment 
and Process Re-Establishment 
Records: Current records of process 
establishment and process re-establishment 
shall be kept on file until superseded, and then kept 
on 
file for an additional five years. 
4.1.2.2 
Test Results: Results of all tests required by this specification 
shall be retained for five years 
after the date of testing. 
4.1.2.3 
Furnace and Quench Process Records: Production processing records required by this 
specification 
shall be kept on file and available for review for five years after the inspection date 
of the product. 
4.1.2.4 
Furnace and Quench Facility Records: Records shall be maintained 
for each furnace and 
quench facility to show compliance with this specification. These records shall include the 
following: furnace number or description, volume of working zone (See 6
.
5
.
3
)
,
 
temperature 
range of usage, whether used for solution heat treatment, age-hardening 
heat treatment, or both; 
and dates and types of major repairs or alterations. These records shall be on file and available 
for review until process re-establishment occurs and then be retained for five years. 
                                                                                          
 

4.1.3 
Heat-Treat Deviations: Any change in heat-treating procedures or equipment that results in 
product not conforming to this specification shall constitute a deviation. Unless such deviation 
is 
approved in writing by the procuring activity, delivery of the product shall be withheld until the 
deviation(s) is(are) corrected and satisfactory performance is re-established (See 3.1.2). 
4.2 
Temperature Surveys of Heating Equipment: 
Process establishment and re-establishment surveys, as well as periodic process surveys, shall be performed in accordance with 3.1, 3.2, and AMS 2750, as applicable. 

4.3 
Spray-Quench Equipment: 
4.3.1 
Process Establishment and Re-Establishment for Spray Quenching: Values of all parameters 
governing effective quenching for each spray quenching unit shall be obtained (See 3.5.3.2). 
Process establishment and re-establishment 
procedures to obtain these values shall consist o
f
 
quenching product representative of all product to be quenched by the unit of concern and, after 
applicable age-hardening, evaluating mechanical properties in accordance with 4.5.1. 
Re-establishment of the process shall be performed whenever conditions change as set forth in 
3.1 2. 
Process establishment and re-establishment data shall be available for verification, review, 
and concurrence by an authorized representative of the procuring activity. 
4.3.1.1 
Procedure for Plate: The quenching procedure shall be a single run each of one **2XXX** series 
alloy and one **7XXX** (preferably 7075) series alloy in the W temper in the minimum 
thickness and 
the maximum thickness of the plate processed through the spray-quench line. The alloys shall 
be sufficiently 
quench-sensitive to provide a good evaluation. The test plate shall be of a size 
which fully evaluates the effective area of furnace and quench chambers. Temperatures and 
pressures within the quenchant line during test quenching shall be recorded and the records 
retained (See 4.1 2.3). 
4.3.1.1.1 
Procedure to Evaluate Quench Effectiveness: Such effectiveness shall be determined by 
evaluating the tensile properties of spray-quenched and age-hardened test pieces 
excised 
from test plates in accordance with ASTM B 557. 
                                                                                          
4.3.1.1.1.1 
Test Specimens: The numbers and locations of specimen blanks to be excised 
shall conform 
to Figures 1 and 2, as applicable to test plate 
thickness. 
4.3.1.1 .1.2 Temper of Test Pieces: Specimen blanks excised 
in accordance with Figure 1 
shall be so 
excised 
from each solution heat-treated and spray-quenched test plate. These specimens 
shall be age-hardened along with the remainder of the test plate or in a laboratory furnace, to 
one temper representative of mill product. Following age-hardening, one specimen blank 
shall be excised from the test plate in accordance with Figure 2. 
 
                                                                                

4.3.1 .I 
.I .
3
 Test Method: Specimens shall be machined from the age-hardened blanks, and tensiontested in accordance with ASTM B 557. Dimensions 
of machined specimens shall comply 
with those specified therein as standards for sheet-type, rectangular specimens, as blank 
dimensions allow. Deviations from standard configurations and dimensions may be made if 
such deviations are allowed in the acquisition 
documents. 
4.3.1.1.1.4 
Pass-Fail Criteria: 
a. Tensile properties of specimens made from plate o
f
 1 
.O-inch or lesser thickness shall 
comply with requirements specified for plate of the same temper and thickness in the 
applicable material 
specification. 
b. Yield and ultimate tensile strengths of specimens made from plate of thicknesses 
exceeding 1 
.O inch shall meet the yield and tensile strengths specified for plate of the 
same temper and thickness in the applicable material specification. Such plate shall 
have no requirements of minimum elongation. 
                                                                                          

4.3.1.2 
Procedure for Extrusions: The quenching procedure shall be a single run each of one 2XXX 
series alloy and one 7XXX series alloy in the W temper in the minimum cross-section and the 
maximum cross-section 
of extrusions processed through the spray-quench line. The alloys shall 
be sufficiently quench-sensitive to provide a good evaluation. The test materials may be 
extrusions of any width with a sufficient number of test pieces quenched at one time to evaluate 
adequately the effective area of furnace and quench chambers. Temperatures and pressures 
within the quenchant line shall be recorded and records retained (See 4.1.2.3). 
4.3.1.2.1 
Procedure to Evaluate Quench Effectiveness: Such effectiveness shall be determined by 
evaluating 
the tensile properties of spray-quenched and age-hardened test pieces excised 
from test extrusions in accordance with ASTM B 557. 
                                                                                          
4.3.1.2.1 .I Test Specimens: Specimen blanks whose longitudinal axis parallels the direction of ram 
travel during the extrusion operation shall be excised at 6-inch intervals across the workingquench width at each end of the spray-quenched load. For determination of the capability of 
the quenching procedure to satisfactorily 
through-quench a section of maximum thickness, 
specimen blanks shall be excised from several locations in the width or thickness direction, 
one of them being 
the **t/2** location, 
as applicable to cross-sectional 
configuration and 
dimensions. The specimen blanks shall be of the sheet type and be capable of being 
machined into tension-test specimens conforming to ASTM B 557, as applicable to 
configuration and dimensions. The blanks shall be excised to a depth of no more than 
0.025 inch above the bottom (during quench) surface of any test extrusion. Deviations from 
standard configurations and dimensions may be made if such deviations are allowed in the 
acquisition documents. 
 

4.3.1.2.1.2 
Temper of Test Pieces: Specimen blanks excised in accordance with 4.3.1.2.1.1 shall be 
age-hardened together with a full simulated production load to one temper representative of 
plant product. 
4.3.1.2.1.3 
Test Method: Tension-test specimens shall be machined from the age-hardened blanks and 
be tension-tested in accordance with ASTM B 557. 
4.3.1.2.1.4 
Pass-Fail Criteria: Specimens shall demonstrate tensile properties complying with 
requirements specified for extrusions of the same temper and cross-sectional dimensions in 
the applicable material specification. 
4.4 
Periodic Product Monitoring: 
4.4.1 
Monitoring Spray Quenching of Plate and Extrusions: Except as otherwise specified or allowed 
herein (See 4.4.1.4), such monitoring 
shall comprise eddy current tests in accordance with 4.5.5 of 
the conductivity of quenched 7075 alloy plate of a minimum 0.250-inch thickness, or extrusions of 
0.250-inch minimum thickness which do not have a thickness between cross-sectional elements 
greater than 0.250 inch. 
4.4.1.1 
Quenching Conditions: The line temperature and pressure of the quenchant throughout a test 
quench shall be maintained within limits determined during process establishment. 
4.4.1.2 
Quenching Records: When product of 0.250 inch or thicker is processed, temperature and 
pressure within the quenchant line shall be recorded for each quench load. Such records shall 
be maintained in accordance with 4.1.2.3. 
4.4.1.3 
Frequency of Product Monitoring: When product of 0.250 inch or thicker is being quenched by a 
system conforming to 3.5.3.2, conductivity of the product shall be measured once during each 
calendar week. In 
addition, at least once in 
every three-month interval, conductivity on product of 
the maximum thickness that the heat-treat line can successfully process, or on product 
of the 
maximum thickness processed in that interval, shall be measured in accordance with 4.5.5. 
4.4.1.4 
Product for Testing: Product of 7075 alloy in 
the dimensions herein specified shall be the product 
tested, unless the producing facility does not fabricate such product or if 7075 is not available at 
the time of the survey. In such absence, product of other alloy in the dimensions specified 
herein 
may be tested, provided that the alloy is sufficiently quench-sensitive for evaluation of system 
performance, and that a definitive conductivity range has been established for such product in a 
temper specified. 
 

4.4.1.5 
Measuring Electrical Conductivity: Test procedures to determine electrical conductivity shall 
conform to 4.5.5. Conductivity measurements shall be made on product in the W temper after 1 
O 
hours or more have elapsed since quenching, or after electrical conductivity has stabilized, but 
prior to artificial aging. Conductivity of plate shall be measured at four-inch maximum intervals 
across the width of the plate and at 24-inch maximum intervals along the length of the plate. 
Readings shall be taken on both sides (faces) of the plate. Conductivity of test extrusions shall 
be measured at two-inch maximum intervals around the section perimeter of test extrusions and 
at 24-inch intervals along an extrusionk length. For extruded shapes (T-, L-sections, etc), 
conductivity measurements on that portion of a surface directly opposite the junction of two or 
more sectional elements shall be excluded. Records shall be maintained in accordance with 
4.1.2. 
4.4.1.6 
Criteria for Quench-System Acceptance - 7075 Plate: When testing 7075 plate, the quenching 
system shall be suspect if the conductivity readings on one side of the plate exhibit a range 
greater than 2.5 percent International Annealed Copper Standard (IACS), or exceed a maximum 
value o
f
 31 
.O percent IACS. 
4.4.1.7 
Criteria for Quench-System Acceptance - Plate Other Than 7075: When plate of an alloy other 
than 7075 is tested, the quenching system shall be suspect if the conductivity readings on one 
side of the plate exhibit a range greater than 2.5 percent IACS, or exceed a maximum established as satisfactory for that alloy, thickness, and temper. 
4.4.1.8 
Criteria for Quench-System Acceptance - 7075 Extrusions: When testing 7075 extrusions, the 
quenching system shall be suspect if the conductivity readings around the section perimeter and 
at 24-inch intervals along the length exhibit a range greater than 4.0 percent IACS, or if the 
values from each element (flange, web, etc) of a shape exhibit a range greater than 3.0 percent 
IACS, or exceed a maximum of 32.0 percent IACS. 
4.4.1.9 
Criteria for Quench-System Acceptance - Extrusions Other Than 7075: When extrusions of an 
alloy other than 7075 are tested, the quenching system shall be suspect if the conductivity 
readings around the section perimeter and at 24-inch intervals along the length exhibit a range 
greater than 4.0 percent IACS, or if 
the values from each element (flange, web, etc) of a shape 
exhibit a range greater than 3.0 percent IACS, or exceed a maximum established as satisfactory 
for that alloy, temper, and cross-sectional configuration and dimensions. 
4.4.1.10 
Test Procedures When Quenching System is Suspect: When a quenching system is suspect, 
additional inspections shall be made of the equipment and test material 
to determine the cause 
or causes of aberration. The cause@) 
shall be corrected and the equipment, procedures and 
product shall be handled in accordance with 4.6.4 and 4.6.4.1. 

 
                                                                                

4.4.2 
Monitoring Immersion Quenching of Product: A plan for such monitoring shall be implemented for 
each forging and casting and for sheet and plate in each applicable thickness range shown in 
Table VI, and for each configuration of other wrought products. As a minimum, the plan shall 
include the following. 
4.4.2.1 
Racking or Spacing Documentation: Documentation, such as drawings or other suitable media 
shall be maintained to ensure proper racking. A record shall be maintained to show that each 
racking plan has produced material satisfying requirements of the applicable material 
specification. When specified in a contract or purchase order, a racking plan shall be examined 
for approval by the procuring activity. Records shall be maintained in accordance with 4.1.2. 
4.4.2.2 
Periodic Inspection: The plan shall include periodic inspection of mill products by electrical conductivity and hardness testing and routine inspection o f castings by mechanical property testing to ensure that the quench continues to be adequate. Inspection frequency shall be agreed upon by procuring activity. Frequency and results of inspection shall be recorded and the records retained in accordance with 4.1.2. 

4.4.2.3 
Inspection for Racking Adequacy: Unless otherwise specified, adequacy of the racking method 
shall be established by electrical conductivity measurements on a suitable quantity of mill products (See 4.5.5 for test method). 
4.4.2.3.1 
Testing of Forgings: Electrical 
conductivity of forgings shall be made on a two-inch grid, unless 
prevented by testpiece configuration. When so prevented, measurements shall be taken in a 
sufficient number of locations to reveal the adequacy of the quench. Alternatively, one test 
piece from each inspection lot may be age-hardened to its specified temper and sectioned into 
test blanks for testing of mechanical properties in accordance with 4.5.1. 
4.4.2.3.2 
Testing of Extrusions: Electrical 
conductivity measurements on extrusions shall be made at 
two-inch maximum intervals 
around the perimeter of the cross-section of the extrusion and at 
24-inch maximum intervals along the length of the extrusion, unless prohibited by the size and 
configuration of the extrusion. It shall not be necessary to check opposite sides of any solid 
sections of the extrusion which are less than 3/8-inch thick, or that portion 
of a surface directly 
opposite the juncture of two or more elements. Exceptions to requirements herein 
shall be 
subject to approval of the cognizant engineering activity. 
4.4.2.3.3 
Testing of Plate: Electrical conductivity test measurements on plate shall be on a grid four 
inches (along width) by 24 inches (along length) on at least one piece 
from the center of the 
load or rack and two other pieces selected at random from the load or pack. 
                                                                                          


## Sae

4.4.2.3.4 
Random-Racked 
or Layered Forgings and Castings: Immersion 
quenching of random-racked 
or layered 
forgings and castings shall be monitored 
on each heat-treat load by electrical 
conductivity 
or hardness measurements made on a two-inch grid spacing on at least one piece 
from the center of the load, and on at least two other pieces selected at random from the load. 
When material configuration prevents a two-inch grid spacing, then a suitable number of 
measurements shall be made to determine adequacy of the quench. 
4.4.3 
Tests for Process Control: 
4.4.3.1 
Material 
and Process Tests: Such tests shall be performed 
in order to demonstrate the capability 
of the facility to produce product meeting requirements of the applicable product specifications 
and other acquisition documents. Tests and testing procedures shall conform to Table VIII and 
4.4.3.2, 
as applicable. 
4.4.3.2 Monthly Test on Furnace Load: Tests of furnace load performance shall be made once each 
month. If more frequent testing is necessary or advisable, a test plan incorporating 
an increased 
frequency shall be adopted. Such plan shall be subject to review and approval by the procuring 
activity. If the monthly workload included plate and/or sheet as well as other metal forms, the 
load to be tested as in Table VIII shall be a "plate and sheet" load. If this product form was not 
heat treated during the month, the test load shall be selected from the available product forms, 
using that form for which Table **VIII** requires the maximum number of test categories. 

## 4.5 Test Methods:

4.5.1 
Mechanical Properties: Specimens shall conform to an appropriate 
type of tensile specimen in 
accordance with ASTM B 557 
and shall be tested in accordance with an appropriate method 
specified therein and shall meet the requirements of 4.6.1, 
4.5.1 .1 
Mechanical Properties o
f
 Wrought Products: Unless every heat-treated 
lot is tested (see 
applicable material specification 
for sampling plan), a minimum of nine tension tests, sampled to 
represent the quantity of the mill product, shall be made on the mill product which was heat 
treated with the monthly production 
test load from each heat-treat furnace or bath being 
operated. The procuring activity may waive this requirement if 
other approved testing 
procedures are used. The tension specimens shall include specimens taken from the portion of 
the load receiving 
the slowest quench, those portions subjected to the highest and lowest 
solution heat-treating 
temperatures, and, when nonuniform shapes have been heat treated, from 
the thickest and thinnest sections of the cross-sectional configuration. The tension specimen 
having the lowest yield strength shall be used for the corrosion test specified in 4
.
5
.
3
.
 

 

 

4.5.1.1.1 
Mechanical Property Tests of Mill Products Where Specimen Taking is Impractical: When 
taking specimens from a heat-treated mill product is impractical, tension specimens shall be 
taken from samples heat treated with a production load. The thickness and alloy of the 
samples and their location in the load shall be selected to represent items heat treated 
during 
the previous month which were considered to have experienced the lowest quench rate and 
those which were subjected to the highest and lowest solution heat-treating temperatures. 
4.5.1.1.2 
Testing of Heat-Treat Loads When Changes are Made in the Heat-Treat Facility: When 
changes are made in the heat-treat facility as outlined in 3.1.2, the mechanical property 
sampling and testing as specified in 4.5.1.1 and 4.5.1.1.1 shall be followed. 
4.5.1.2 
Mechanical Properties of Casting **Alloys:** The required tests for casting alloys shall be in 
conformance with the applicable casting product specifications. 

## 4.5.2

Melting and Porosity Resulting from Solution Heat Treatment: One or more of the heat-treated specimens tested in accordance with 4.5.1.1 shall be examined for evidence of melting and porosity and shall conform to the requirements of **4.6.2.** Each specimen shall be prepared for examination by sectioning, and then polishing one surface generated by the sectioning to appropriate fineness. Each polished surface shall be examined under a metallurgical microscope at 500 diameters magnification to detect porosity resulting from solution heat treatment. Following this examination, the polished surfaces shall be etched for approximately two seconds in Keller's reagent or other suitable etching solution and examined for evidence of melting during solution heat treatment. 

4.5.3 
Intergranular Corrosion Test: Corrosion tests shall be conducted in accordance with the procedure 
outlined below and samples shall conform to the requirements of 4.6.3. In the case of alclad 
alloys, the alclad shall be removed from both sides of the sample by filling or by other suitable 
means. Prior to the corrosion test, each sample shall be immersed for 1 minute in an etching 
solution at 200 O
F
 to produce a uniform surface condition. The solution shall have the following 
composition: 
                                                                                          

50 milliliters 
5 milliliters 
945 milliliters 
Nitric acid, concentrated (70 percent) 
Hydrofluoric acid **(48** percent) 
Distilled or deionized 
water 

After this etching treatment, the sample shall be rinsed in distilled or deionized water, immersed for one minute in concentrated nitric acid (70 percent) at room temperature to remove any metallic copper that may have been plated out on the specimen, and rinsed in distilled or deionized water, then allowed to dry. The sample shall be corroded by immersion in a minimum o f
 30 milliliters per square inch of surface area in a solution of the following composition, which shall be prepared immediately before use (the temperature during the immersion period shall be 86°F i 
9): 
                                                                                

## Ams-H-6088 Sae 4.5.3 (Continued):

Sodium chloride 
Hydrogen peroxide (30 percent) 
Distilled or deionized water 
57 grams 
10 milliliters Dilute to 1 liter 

The immersion period shall be 6 I 
All chemical$ shall be reagent grade. 

                                                                                          

4.5.3.1 
Number of Specimens in Container: More than one specimen of the same alloy and temper may 
be etched in a container, provided that at least 30 milliliters of solution are used for each square 
inch of specimen surface, and the specimens are electrically insulated 
from each other. 
4.5.3.2 
Microscopic Examination: At the end of the immersion period, the sample shall be removed from 
the solution, washed, and dried. A cross-section specimen, which shall be at least 314 inch long 
whenever the size of the sample permits, shall be cut from the sample and mounted for 
microscopic examination. Microscopic examination shall be made on the specimen, both before 
and after etching, at 100 to 500 diameters magnification 
with a metallurgical microscope. The 
etching shall be done by immersion for 6 to 20 seconds in a solution of the following composition: 

Nitric acid, concentrated (70 percent) 
2.5 milliliters 
Hydrochloric 
acid, concentrated 
1.5 milliliters 
Hydrofluoric 
acid (48 percent) 
1 
.O milliliter 
Distilled or deionized 
water 
95.0 milliliters 

All chemicals shall be reagent grade. 

4.5.4 
Test for Diffusion in Alclad Alloys: A microscopic 
examination 
of sections of specimens cut from 
mill products representative 
of a lot or furnace load shall be made to determine the extent of 
diffusion of the alloying constituents 
through the cladding. Examination shall be made with a 
metallurgical microscope at 1 
O0 
to 1,000 diameters magnification, after etching as specified in 
4.5.3.2 and specimens shall conform to the requirements 
of 4.6.3. The solution potential 
measurement method for evaluation of alclad diffusion 
is acceptable providing documentation 
which correlates this method to the optical method is available for review. 
4.5.5 
Eddy-Current Measurements of Electrical 
Conductivity: 
4.5.5.1 
Procedure Requirements: Electrical 
conductivity inspection 
shall be performed, as specified 
herein, in accordance with MIL-STD-1537. The procedure shall be available to the procuring 
activity. 
4.5.5.2 
Equipment Calibration: 
The equipment to measure electrical 
conductivity shall be calibrated in 
accordance with MIL-STD-1537 except that the number of standards necessary shall be as 
recommended by the device's manufacturer. 
 

4.5.5.3 
Personnel Qualification: Personnel conducting eddy current inspections shall be trained and 
qualified 
as specified in MIL-STD-1537. 
4.5.6 
Hardness Measurements: When required, hardness of product shall be tested in accordance with 
ASTM E 1 
O or ASTM E **18,** as applicable to the product to be tested. The use of ASTM E l  
03 for 
"pass-fail" inspections during manufacture is neither mandated nor forbidden. When a question 
arises about hardness data gathered using the method of ASTM E 103, additional hardness data 
shall be taken using 
the methods of ASTM E 10 or E 18, as applicable to the product. 
4.6 
Limits of Acceptability: 
4.6.1 Mechanical Properties: The heat-treated (or re-solution heat-treated) test samples shall exhibit 
tensile strength, yield strength, and elongation not less than those specified in applicable product 
specifications or detail drawings. 
4.6.2 
Melting and Porosity Resulting From Solution Heat Treatment: Specimens, prepared in 
accordance with 4.5.2, shall show no evidence of melting resulting from solution heat treatment 
and the specimens shall be substantially free from porosity caused by hydrogen diffusion during 
solution heat treatment. 
4.6.3 
Intergranular Corrosion and Alclad Diffusion: The degree of susceptibility 
to intergranular corrosion 
and degree of alclad diffusion shall be no greater than that normally experienced when following 
the practices recommended in this specification. Practices other than those recommended herein 
may be employed (See 4.6.3.1), provided it is documented that the resulting degrees of 
intergranular corrosion and alclad diffusion 
are no greater than those resulting from applications of 
the recommended practices, as applicable to product. This objective evidence shall be retained in 
accordance with 4.1.2.2. 
                                                                                          
4.6.3.1 Tests for Alclad Diffusion and Susceptibility to Intergranular Corrosion: Prior to using equipment 
or procedures which vary from those recommended herein, tests shall be made to determine the alclad diffusion and susceptibility 
to intergranular corrosion produced by the proposed variation. 
Decision 
as to whether the alclad diffusion and the susceptibility to intergranular corrosion is 
excessive shall be based upon comparison with samples of the same thickness from the same 
piece of raw stock, heat treated in accordance with the equipment and procedures 
recommended and specified herein. 
4.6.4 
Failures: The occurrence of failure(s) during any of the tests specified herein shall give rise to an 
evaluation of the adequacy of heat treatment(s). If 
the test failure is attributed to improper heat 
treatment, the equipment and procedures shall not be used until 
the deviation(s) is (are) corrected 
and the applicable part(s) of the equipment and procedures are re-established i
n
 accordance with 
3.1.2, as specified in 4.2 or 4.3.1. Re-establishment may be waived by the procuring 
activity if 
corrective action, to bring the equipment and procedures back into conformance with the 
requirements herein, is implemented and verified by documentation. 

                                                                                          

 
                                                                                

4.6.4.1 
Status of Product: Product heat treated in the interval between the occurrences of the last 
satisfactory inspection results and the first unsatisfactory 
inspection results shall be deemed 
questionable. Each unit of questionable product 
shall be inspected, unless the inspection 
method is a destructive test. Destructive testing shall entail a sampling plan agreed upon 
between the product vendor and the acquisitioner. Unsatisfactory 
product may be re-solution 
heat treated unless the product exhibits eutectic or other localized melting, excessive porosity 
resulting 
from solution heat treatment, or in the case of alclad product, shows a harmful 
degree of 
diffusion of alloying elements from the core through the cladding. Alclad product which is 
questionable or fails for reasons other than those enumerated above may be re-solution 
heat 
treated up to the limit of the permissible 
number of times specified in Table **111.** Inspection results 
shall be documented. 

## 4.7 Heat-Treat Lot Numbers For Forgings:

Each heat-treat lot of forgings (See 6.5.2) 
shall be assigned a lot number. Each forging in the lot shall display its lot number, unless such display is infeasible or would result in nonconformance to the applicable product specification. If such display is not feasible, each lot shall be identified by tags or travellers. Lot numbers shall be entered in records kept by the furnace and quench facilities and in records of tests conducted by the quality control laboratory. The entire history of the heat treatment of each heat-treated forging shall be traceable through the records specified herein. 

## 5. Packaging:

                                                                                          
Not applicable. 

## 6. Notes: 6.1 Intended Use:

This specification is intended for use in all phases of the control of processes and equipment applied to the heat treatment of aluminum alloy cast, forged, rolled, drawn, and extruded products. It covers products which are essentially raw materials for subsequent operations. It does not cover "parts" in the meaning of that term used in AMS 2770 
which is not intended to be applicable to primary mill products. Assigning a part number to a mill product does not change its status from that of a raw mill product to that of a part. 

 

## 6.2 Acquisition Requirements:

Acquisition documents should specify the following: 
Title, number, and revision letter of this specification. 

Issue o f DODISS 
to be cited in the solicitation, and if required, the specific issue of individual documents referenced (See 2.2). 

When verification of process establishment is required (See 3.1). 

Conditions governing heat treatment of parts (See 3.4). 

Exceptions to provisions of 4.1. 

## 6.3 General Information:

6.3.1 
Advantages of Salt Baths: The time required to bring 
the load to temperature is shorter and 
uniform temperature is more easily maintained in molten salt baths than in air chamber furnaces. 
When solution heat treating in molten salt, the danger of generating porosity is greatly diminished. 
After prolonged use, there is some decomposition of the sodium nitrate 
to form compounds which, 
when dissolved in the quenching water, attack the aluminum alloys. The addition to the salt bath o
f
 
about *112* ounce of sodium or potassium dichromate per 100 pounds of nitrate 
tends to inhibit this 
attack. Nitrate salt baths may present an explosion safety hazard when heat treating 5XX.X 
casting alloys. 
6.3.2 
                                                                                          
Advantages of Air Chamber Furnaces: Air chamber furnaces are more flexible and more economical for handling large volumes of work. When solution heat treating certain aluminum alloys it is necessary to control the atmosphere in order to avoid the generation of porosity. Such porosity lowers the mechanical properties of aluminum alloys and may be manifest as large numbers of minute blisters over the surface of the product. In severe cases, the product may even crack when it is quenched. Fumace products of combustion contain water vapor and may contain gaseous compounds o f sulfur, both of which tend to promote porosity during solution heat treatment. For this reason, furnaces which permit their products of combustion to come in contact with the load are not recommended for the solution heat treatment of alloys which may become porous during such treatment. Either anodic oxide films or the metal coating of the alclad materials protect the underlying alloy from this effect. Also, certain fluoroborates will protect against or minimize this effect. 

6.3.3 
Solution Heat Treatment: Solution heat treatment is a process to heat an alloy to a suitable 
temperature (See Table Il) 
for sufficient 
time to allow soluble constituents to enter into solid 
solution where they are retained in a supersaturated state by rapid cooling in a suitable quenching 
medium. 
6.3.3.1 
Soaking Time: The soaking time required to bring 
about the necessary degree o
f
 solid solution 
increases with increasing thickness of the metal. The minimum soaking period is determined by 
testing samples of the metal 
to make certain 
that the required mechanical properties have been 
developed. The soaking periods recommended in Tables IV and V have been found to be 
sufficient in commercial practice. 
 

6.3.3.2 
Development of Hydrogen Porosity: When solution heat treating in air chamber furnaces, 
excessive soaking periods increase the danger of the development of hydrogen porosity, a 
phenomenon formerly known as "high temperature oxidation". However, with proper control of 
furnace atmospheres, soaking periods longer than those listed in Tables IV and V may be used 
safely. 
6.3.3.3 
Diffusion in Clad Products: The soaking period for clad products should be the minimum which is 
necessary to develop the required mechanical properties. Longer soaking may allow the alloying 
constituents o
f
 the base metal to diffuse through the alclad coating. When this occurs, corrosion 
resistance is adversely affected. Consequently, every effort should be made to avoid diffusion by 
using the minimum possible soaking periods for clad products. 
6.3.3.4 
Incorrect Solution Heat-Treating Temperature: If 
the specified maximum temperature is 
exceeded, there is danger of localized melting, with possible lowering of the mechanical 
properties of the alloy. Excessive overheating will cause severe blistering in the product. If the 
temperature is below the minimum specified, solution is incomplete, the maximum mechanical 
properties are not developed, and corrosion resistance can be adversely affected. 
6.3.3.5 
Effect of Re-Solution Heat Treatment on Corrosion Resistance o f
 201 
7-T4 and 2024-13 
and -T4: If the temperature used for re-solution heat treatment of 2017-T4 or 2024-T3 and -T4 
product is less than that applied in the initial heat treatment, a **loss** of corrosion resistance results. Since the use of a longer soaking period tends to overcome this **loss,** both a longer-thanaverage soaking period and a solution heat-treating temperature within 5 O F  
of the applicable maximum tabulated are recommended for re-solution heat treatment of each of these alloys. 

6.3.3.6 
Thermal Treatment of Forgings to -01 Condition: This is a high temperature anneal given to a 
forging for a special purpose such as to accentuate ultrasonic response or provide dimensional 
stability. In 
order to be so annealed, product is held at approximately the same temperature for 
approximately the same time period as in solution heat treatment, but in this instance the product 
is slowly cooled to room temperature. This anneal is applied to products that are to be machined 
prior to solution heat treating and aging to the desired temper. This application is neither 
mandatory nor forbidden, provided that all other requirements specified herein, in the applicable 
product specification, and in other applicable acquisition documents are met. The Government 
reserves the right to require the use or nonuse of such treatments, if these conditions are not 
being met. 
                                                                                          
6.3.4 
Quenching for Resistance to Corrosion: For products in some tempers of 21 
17 and bare and 
alclad 2024 and 7075 alloys, a rapid quench is necessary so that the resulting product will have 
maximum resistance to corrosion. As the quench rate is lowered, these alloys become 
increasingly susceptible to intergranular attack which causes excessive **loss** of mechanical 
properties after exposure to corrosives. 
6.3.5 
Alloy and Temper Designation: The alloy and temper designations used herein conform to the 
American National Standards Institute Publication, ANSI H35.1. 
 
                                                                                

6.3.6 
Alclad Sheet: Alclad sheet is a product consisting of an aluminum alloy sheet having on one or 
both surfaces a layer of aluminum or aluminum alloy integrally bonded to the surface of the base 
metal. In general, alclad sheets have mechanical properties slightly lower than those of the bare 
alloy sheets of the same thickness. However, the corrosion resistant qualities of the aluminum alloy sheet are improved by the cladding. 

## 6.3.7 Annealing Treatments:

6.3.7.1 
Annealing of Work-Hardened Wrought Alloys: Table XI lists recommended annealing conditions 
for work-hardened wrought aluminum alloys. For desired results for a specific product, optimum 
annealing conditions should be determined. In 
order to avoid excessive oxidation and grain 
growth, the annealing temperature should not exceed 775 O
F
.
 
6.3.7.2 
Relief of Residual Stresses in Castings: The process of soaking castings for 2 hours at 650 to 
750" F and then cooling them to room temperature, will relieve residual stresses in castings and 
attain dimensional stability. 
6.3.7.3 
Partial 
Anneal of Heat-Treated Aluminum Alloys: When 2XXX, GXXX, and 7XXX series 
aluminum alloys in the heat-treated condition are heated at 650 O F  
and cooled, they have been 
partially annealed and can be moderately (not severely) formed. Each particular application 
should be optimized for retained strength and formability. When attempting to restore the 
aluminum alloy to its initial heat-treated condition, a complete re-solution heat treatment will be 
necessary. 
6.3.7.4 
Full Anneal of Heat-Treatable Wrought Alloys: All 2XXX, GXXX, and 7XXX series aluminum 
alloys when fully annealed according to recommended general conditions presented in Table XI 
obtain their lowest strength and best formability. However, they will require a complete heat 
treatment (solution heat treatment, quench, and age) to develop their desired properties. 
6.3.8 
Aging: Aging causes precipitation of alloying elements from solid solution resulting in an increase 
in strength properties o
f
 an alloy. This usually occurs slowly at room temperature (natural aging - 
See Table il) 
and more rapidly at elevated temperature (artificial aging - See Table Vil). 
Age-hardening is followed by normal cooling in a room temperature atmosphere. (The term 
"precipitation" 
is frequently used in lieu of "age-hardening".) Age-hardening heat treatments 
needing relatively long times and relatively low temperatures to develop required properties are 
recommended for products with large cross sections or large masses to promote uniformity of 
properties. Alternate treatment on other products utilizing shorter times at proportionately higher 
temperatures may be used if all material requirements are met. 
 

6.3.8.1 
Artificial Aging: 
6.3.8.1.1 
Example of Artificial 
Aging: Heating of aluminum alloy bare and alclad 2024 at an elevated 
temperature - but well below the annealing temperature - after solution heat treatment and 
natural aging (temper -T4), will result in tensile and yield strengths considerably higher than 
those which would result even with prolonged room temperature aging of this alloy. There is 
also a decrease in the elongation 
of the material. This process is called "elevated temperature 
precipitation heat treatment" or "artificial 
aging." 
6.3.8.1.2 
Effect of Cold Work on Artificial Aging: The mechanical properties resulting from the aging 
treatment are dependent on the amount of cold work present in the material at the time of 
artificial 
aging. The mechanical 
properties 
that can be developed in any design are dependent, 
therefore, upon the severity of the forming operations used in fabricating the part, and this will 
govern the selection of the temper of stock material used. For example, if only slight forming is 
involved, 2024-T36 or 2024-T361 material, which contains a considerable 
degree of cold work, 
could be used with resultant higher mechanical properties of the aged part than could be 
obtained if 2024-0 or 2024-T3 material were used. The amount of cold work put into the part 
during the forming operation will add to that in the stock metal and, therefore, the formed part 
will generally have greater ultimate and yield strength and lower elongation after aging than 
would a piece of stock material given the same aging treatment. 
6.3.8.1.2. 
Effect of Heat on Cold Work: Annealing or solution heat treating will remove any cold work 
present in the material so treated. Subsequent solution heat treatment and artificial 
aging of 
the annealed material, will result in 
-T6 conditions, provided the material 
is not reworked prior 
to aging. The higher strength conditions can be obtained only if known amount of cold 
working are accomplished prior to natural or artificial aging operations. For example, to 
obtain -T81, -T84, and -T861 conditions, the material would have to be cold-worked to 
approximately 1, 4, and 6 percent, respectively, subsequent to solution heat 
treatment and 
prior to natural and artificial aging. 
 

## Ams-H-6088

6.3.9 
Mechanical Stress Relief of Plate, Extrusions, and Forgings: To provide relief of residual stresses, plate, extrusions, and forgings are stretched or compressed after solution treatment, but prior to aging as follows: 

6.3.9.1 
Plate. Stretched **1.5** to 3 percent permanent set to produce the TXX51 tempers. 
6.3.9.2 
Extrusions. Stretched 1 
to 3 percent permanent set to produce the TXX51 tempers (14, or 
compressed 1 
to 5 percent permanent set to produce the TXX52 tempers. 
6.3.9.3 
Forgings. Stretched 1 
to 5 percent permanent set to produce the TXX51 tempers. 
6.3.9.4 
Forgings. Compressed 1 
to 5 percent permanent set to produce the TXX52 tempers. 
1/ Modifications to this temper are: TXX510 which applies to products that receive no straightening aíter stretching and TXX511 which applies to products that receive minor straightening after stretching so as to comply with straightness tolerances. 

6.3.1 O 
Influence of Residual Tensile Stress on Stress-Corrosion Behavior: Heat-treatment features, 
such as quenching medium and aging treatment (as well as straightening procedure after 
solution heat treatment), can significantly 
affect the level of residual tensile stress in a part and 
influence stress-corrosion behavior. These heat-treatment features should be optimum with 
regard to minimizing residual tensile stress. 
6.3.1 
Electrical 
Conductivity, Hardness, and Temper Relationships: For information 
purposes only, 
Tables IX and X present typical values relating electrical conductivity and hardness with temper 
for non-clad and alclad aluminum alloys. 

## Consideration Of Data Requirements:

6.4 
The following data requirements should be considered when this specification is applied on a contract. The applicable Data Item Descriptions (DID'S) should be reviewed in conjunction with the specific acquisition to ensure that only essential data are requested/provided and that the DID'S 
are tailored to reflect the requirements of the specific acquisition. To ensure correct contractual application o f the data requirements, a Contract Data Requirements List (DD Form 1423) must be prepared to obtain the data, except where DOD FAR Supplement 27.475-1 exempts the requirement for a DD Form 1423. - 
- 
lllmïlk 
3.5.2.1, 3.8, 3.8.1.2, 4.1.2, DI-MISC-80653 
Test Reports 
4.1.2.1, 4.1.2.3, 4.1.2.4, 
4.3.1, 4.5.6, 4.6.4.1 

| 4.7           |
|---------------|
| List/         |
| Internal Data |
|               | 

 
                                                                                

## 6.4 (Continued):

The above DID'S 
were those cleared as of the date of this specification. The current issue of DOD 
501 
0
.

1
 
2-L, Acquisition Management Systems and Data Requirements Control List (AMSDL), must be researched to ensure that only current, cleared DID'S 
are cited on the DD Form 1423. 

## 6.5 Definitions:

Some of the terms defined in this paragraph are so defined as to be especially pertinent to this specification. 

                                                                                          
6.5.1 
Heat Treatment: The phrase "heat treatment" as used in this specification is meant to collective,j 
include all thermal treatments covered by this specification such as: solution heat treatment, age-hardening heat treatment, stabilizing, and annealing. 
6.5.2 
Heat-Treat Lot, Forgings: A heat-treat lot consists of an identifiable quantity of metal of the same 
alloy and of the same product form, temper, and thickness or section, and of the same process 
history, all forgings, having been processed at the same time through a heat-treat and quench 
facility, or as a continuous production run in a continuous heat-treating 
furnace and quench facility 
during a maximum of eight hours or as required by the applicable material specification. 
6.5.3 
Working Zone: Working zone i
s
 that portion of the enclosed volume of a piece of thermal 
processing equipment occupied by parts or raw material during the soaking portion of a thermal 
treatment. It is usually, but not always, a high percentage of the total enclosed volume. 
6.5.4 
Contractual Requirements and Recommendations: Wherever used in this specification, the word 
"shall" indicates a mandatory requirement, and the word %hould indicates a recommendation. 
6.5.5 
Blistering and Porosity Resulting From Solution Heat Treatment: Such occurrences have in the 
past been called high temperature oxidation. It is now known that hydrogen entering aluminum 
alloys during solution heat treatment is the cause for development of surface blisters and 
subsurface patterns of pores. 
6.5.6 
Authorized Representative: Any Government representative specifically authorized to approve equipment, material, or procedures within the scope of this document. They can be, but are not limited to, the following: 
Contracting Officer Defense Industrial Supply Center (DISC) 
Defense Contract Management Command (DCMC) 
Defense Plant Representative Office (DPRO) 

6.5.7 
Cognizant Engineering Activity: The engineering organization responsible for the design of the 
item being heat treated. 
 

## Ams-H-6088 Ams-H-6088 Patent Notice: 6.6

The Government does not possess a royalty-free license for heat treatment of 7175 alloy forgings under U
.

S
.

 
Patent Number 3,791,876 which expires 12 February 1994. The Department of Defense has no opinion about the novelty, uniqueness, and effectiveness of the patented procedure, nor does the Department offer any advice concerning the seeking of a license to apply that procedure. 

6.7 
Product processed and marked to the requirements of AMs-H-6088 also meets the requirements of 
MIL-H-6088, Revision G, Amendment 1. Product processed **and** marked to the requirements of 
MIL-H-6088G, Amendment 1, also meets the requirements of AMs-H-6088. 
6.8 
Changes authorized by MIL-H-6088, Revision G, Amendment 1, have been incorporated into 
3.7.2.2. 
 
                                                                                

Quality Assurance 
paragraph 
(s) 
Requirement 
paragraph@) 
3.1, 3.1.2 
4.1.2.1, 4.2, 
4.3.1 
lishment and reestablishment 

                                                                                          

| 3.2              |   4.2  |
|------------------|--------|
| 3.3              |    4.4 |
| Periodic process |        |
| surveys          |        |
| Periodic product |        |
| monitoring       |        |

 

Products 11 
and limitations 
2/ 
Solution 
Temper designation 
heattreating 
Immediately 
Aíter 
After 
aíter 
natural 
stress 
(metal) 
quenching 
aging 31 
relief 4
1
 
temperature 
(degrees 
F) 
51 
945-995 
-W 
I 
-T3 6
1
,
 -T4 
-T451 
Alloy 
201 
1 
Iwire, rod, 
2014 
bar 
flat sheet 
925-945 
-W 
-T3 *61,* -T42 
-- 
coiled sheet 
925-945 
-W 
-T4, -T42 
-- 
plate 
9 
2 
5 
- 
9 
4 
5 
-W 
-T4, -T42 
-T451 
wire, rod, 
925-945 
-W 
-T4 
-T451 
bar 
extrusions 
925-945 
-W 
-T4, -T42 
-T451 
O, 
201 
7 
-T4511 
drawn tube 
925-945 
-W 
-T4 
-- 
wire, rod, 
9 
2 
5 
- 
9 
5 
O 
-W 
-T4 
-T451 
bar 
rivets 
925-950 
-W 
-T4 
-- 
2024 
flat sheet 
91 
0-930 
-W 
-T3 6
1
,
 -T361 
-- 
61, 
-T42 
coiled sheet 
91 
0-930 
-W 
-T4, -T42, 
-- 
-T3 6
1
 
rivets 
91 
0-930 
-W 
-T4 
-- 
plate 
wire, rod, bar 
extrusions 
drawn tube sheet, plate 
wire, rod, 
21 
17 
|            | 91          | 0-930    |
|------------|-------------|----------|
| -W         | -T4, -T42,  | -T351    |
| -T361      |             |          |
| 61         |             |          |
| 91         | 0-930       |          |
| 71         |             |          |
| -W         | -T4, -T36 6 | 1        |
| -T42       |             |          |
| 91         | 0-930       | -W       |
| 61,        |             |          |
| -T42       | -T351       |          |
| O,         |             |          |
| T3511      |             |          |
| 91         | 0-930       | -W       |
| 61,        |             |          |
| -T42       |             |          |
| --         |             |          |
| 91         | 0-930       | -W       |
| 925-950    | -W          | -T4      |
| --         |             |          |
| bar        |             |          |
| I          |             |          |
| rivets     |             |          |
| 890-950    |             |          |
| -W         |             |          |
| I          |             |          |
| -T4        |             |          |
| --         |             |          |
| 21         | 24          |          |
| 2219       |             |          |
| plate      | 91          | 0-930    |
| 2/,        |             |          |
| -T42       | -T351       |          |
| sheet      | 985-1       | 005      |
| -W         |             |          |
| -T31 6     | 1           | ,        |
| --         |             |          |
| plate      |             |          |
| 6/,        |             |          |
| -T42       |             |          |
| 985-1      |             |          |
| 005        |             |          |
| -W         |             |          |
| -T31       |             |          |
| 61,        |             |          |
| -T37       | -T351       |          |
| 6          | 1           | ,        |
| 985-1      | 005         |          |
| -W         |             |          |
| -T4        |             |          |
| --         |             |          |
| 985-1      | 005         | -W       |
| 61,        |             |          |
| -T42       | -T351       |          |
| rivets     |             |          |
| wire, rod, |             |          |
| bar        |             |          |
|            |             |          |
|            |             |          |
|            |             |          |
|            |             |          |
|            |             |          |
|            |             |          |
Alloy 
tions 
Ternper desianation 
Products 11 
and lirnita- 
Immediately 
aiter 
quenching 
2/ 
Solution 
heattreating 
(metal) 
temperature 
(degrees F) 
E
d
 
1 
Wrought products (EX 
221 
9 
I 
extrusions 
I 
985-1005 
SIDING FORGING 
-W 
-T351 
O, 
-T3511 
-T31 6
1
,
 -T42 
601 
O 
Isheet 
I 
1045-1065 
-W 
6013 
Isheet 
I 
1045-1065 
__ 
-T4 
I 
-W -W 
-W 
606 
1 
sheet 
I 
960-1075 81 
plate 
I 
960-1075 
wire, rod, 
I 
bar 
I 
960-1075 
-W 
-T4, -T42 
-T451 
lextrusions 
I 
960-1075 
-W 
-T4, -T42 
-T451 
O, 
6063 
drawn 
tube 
960-1 
075 
extrusions 
960-985 
6066 
drawn tube 
960-980 
extrusions 
960-1010 
-T4, -T42 -T4, -T42 
NIA 
-T451 
O, 
6262 
drawn tube 
960-1 
O1 
O 
wire, rod, 
960-1 
050 
bar 
-T4 
le*Nsions 
I 
960-1050 
-W 
I 
I 
Idrawn 
tube 
I 
960-1050 
6951 
I 
sheet 
I 
975-995 
-W 
-W 
7001 
lextrusions 
I 
860-880 
-W 
plate 
880-900 
sheet 
840-860 91 
plate 
840-860 9
1
 
extrusions 
860-885 
                                                                                          
-W 
-W 
-W512/ -W510 2/ -W511 2/ 
-W 
extrusions 
880-900 

 

| wire, rod,    | 880-900     |
|---------------|-------------|
| rivets        |             |
| sheet         | 860-930 101 |
| plate         |             |
| 111           |             |
| 860-930       |             |
| wire, rod,    | 860-930     |
| +             |             |
| bar 111       |             |

 
                                                                                

After 
natural 
aging 3
1
 
Aiter 
stress 
relief 41 
-W 
-W 
-T4611 
-W 
-W 
-T4511 
-T4, -T42 
-T451 
-W 
-W 
-T451 
O, 
-T4511 
__ 
-- 
-T4 -T4, -T42 
-- 
-W51 
O 2/ 
W511 2/ 
-W -W 
-W 
-W512/ 
-W510 2/ 
-W511 2/ 
-W 
-W 
-- 
I 
__ 
-W -W -W 
-W512/ -W512/ 
I 
| Solution                              | Temper designation    |
|---------------------------------------|-----------------------|
| Products                              |                       |
| 11                                    |                       |
| heat-                                 |                       |
| Alloy                                 |                       |
| and limita-                           | treating              |
| tions                                 | (metal)               |
| Immediately                           |                       |
| Aíter                                 | Aíter                 |
| after                                 |                       |
| natural                               | stress                |
| quenching                             | aging                 |
| 3                                     | 1                     |
| relief 41                             |                       |
| 2/                                    |                       |
| temperature                           |                       |
| (degrees                              |                       |
| F)                                    |                       |
| 51                                    |                       |
| Wrought products (EXCLUDING FORGINGS) |                       |
| 7075                                  | extrusions            |
| --                                    |                       |
| -W510                                 |                       |
| 2/                                    |                       |
| -W511                                 |                       |
| 2l                                    |                       |
| drawn tube                            | 860-880               |
| --                                    |                       |
| -.                                    |                       |
| 71                                    | 50                    |
| 2/                                    |                       |
| -W511                                 |                       |
| 2/                                    |                       |
| plate                                 | 880-895               |
| 2/                                    |                       |
| 71                                    |                       |
| 78                                    | sheet 131             |
| -W                                    |                       |
| _-                                    |                       |
| plate                                 |                       |
| 131                                   |                       |
| 860-91                                |                       |
| O                                     |                       |
| -W                                    |                       |
| __                                    |                       |
| -W51                                  |                       |
| 2l                                    |                       |
| extrusions                            | 860-880               |
| --                                    |                       |
| -W51                                  | O                     |
| 2/                                    |                       |
| -W511                                 |                       |
| 2/                                    |                       |
| 7475                                  | sheet                 |
| 880-970                               | -W                    |
| --                                    |                       |
| __                                    |                       |
| plate                                 |                       |
| 880-970                               | -W                    |
| --                                    | --                    |
| 7475                                  | sheet                 |
| 880-945                               | -W                    |
| --                                    |                       |
| --                                    |                       |
| Alclad                                |                       |
| Forgings 14/                          |                       |
|                                       |                       |

 
                                                                                

Temper designation 
Immediately 
Products 11 
and limitations 
quenching 
aging 3/ 
natural 
stress 
relief 4
1
 
Solution 
heattreating 
(metal) 
temperature 
(degrees F) 
51 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
-- 
950 - 970 
-- 
-T4 
-- 
-- 
930 - 950 
_- 
-T4 
-- 
-- 
950 - 970 
- 
-T45 
-- 
-- 
940 - 970 
-- 
-T45 
-- 
-- 
980 - 995 
__ 
-T4 
-- 
__ 
960 - 995 
__ 
-T4 
__ 
~~ 
~~ 
~- 
-
-
 
__ 
-- 
-T4 
-- 
980 - 1025 
__ 
12/ 
__ 
-T4 
__ 
328.0 
(Red X-8) 
333.0 
(333) 
336.0 
(A332.0) 
A336.0 
(A332.0) 
354.0 
(354) 
355.0 
(3551, 
C355.0 
356.0 
(3561, 
A356.0 
(A356) 
Products 
1 
t 
and limitations 
Immediately 
afier 
quenching 
After 
After 
natural 
stress 
aging 3
1
 
relief 4t 
Solution 
heattreating 
(metal) 
temperature 
(degrees F) 
5t 
I 
21 
__ 
-T4 
-- 
980 - 1025 
12/ 
-- 
-T4 
-- 
980 - 1010 
-- 
-T4 
357.0 
__ 
(3571, 
A357.0 
-_ 
(A357) 
350.0 
-. 
t 
(359) 
I 
I 
520.0 
-- 
800 - 820 
-- 
-T4 

11 
The term "wire, rod, and bar" as 
used herein refers 
to rolled 
or cold 
finished wire, rod, and bar. The term "extrusions" 
refers to extruded 
wire, rod, bar, shapes, and tube. 
This temper is unstable 
and generally 
not available. 
2l 
31 
Applies only to those alloys which will naturally 
age to a substantially 
stable condition. See Table **VI1** for natural 
aging 
times. 
41 
                                                                                          
For rolled 
or extruded 
products, 
metal is stress relieved 
by stretching 
after quenching, and for forgings, metal is stress 
relieved 
by stretching 
or compression aíter quenching. 
5
1
 
When a difference 
between 
the maximum and minimum 
temperatures of a range listed herein 
exceeds 20 O
F
,
 any 20 
O
F
 
temperature 
range (or 30°F range 
for 6061) within the entire range may be utilized (See 3
.
5
.
1
.
5
)
,
 
provided 
that no 
exclusions 
or qualifying 
criteria 
are cited herein 
or in 
the applicable 
material 
specification. 

| Cold working subsequent to solution heat    | treatment and prior to any precipitation heat    | treatment is necessary.    |
|---------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|

61 
7
1
 
Temperatures 
as low as 900 **O F**  may be used, provided 
that every heat 
treat lot is tested 
to show that the requirements 
o
f
 
the applicable 
matenal specification 
are met, and analysis of test data to show statistic conformance 
to the specification 
limits is available 
for review. 
81 
Maximum 
temperature 
for alclad 
6061 sheet should not exceed 1000 "F. 
                                                                                          
91 
Other temperatures may be necessary 
for certain 
sections, conditions, 
and requirements. 
1 
o/ 
It must be recognized 
that under some conditions 
melting 
can occur when heating 
7075 alloy above 900 O F  
and that 
caution 
should 
be exercised 
to avoid 
this problem. In order to minimize diffusion 
between 
the cladding 
and 
the core, 
alclad 7075 sheet in thicknesses 
of 0.020 inch or less may be solution heat-treated 
at 850" 
to 930 "F. 
 
                                                                                

111 
For plate thicknesses over 4 inches 
and for rod diameters or bar thicknesses over 4 inches, a maximum temperature of 
910 O
F
 is recommended 
to avoid melting. 
12l 
Heat treatment above 1010 
O F  
may require an intermediate 
solution heat treatment of one hour at 1000 - 1010 
O F  
to 
prevent eutectic melting 
of magnesium 
rich phases. 
Under some conditions 
melting can occur when heating 
this alloy above 900 degrees F. 
1
3
1
 
Unless otherwise indicated, hand 
forgings include 
rolled rings, and die forgings include impacts. 
1 
4/ 
1 
5/ 
Heat-treating 
procedures 
are at present proprietary among producers. At least one such procedure, i
s
 patented 
(US. 
Patent Number 3,791,876). (See 6.6). 
Former commercial designation is shown in parentheses. 
16/ 
1 
71 
Unless otherwise specified 
solution 
heat treatment is not required. Castings should be quickly cooled after shake-out or 
stripping from molds, so as to obtain a fine tin distribution. 
1 
81 
In 
general, product should 
be soaked 
for two 
hours in the range 91 
0-930 
O F  
prior to heating 
into the solution heat-treating 
range. Other presolution 
heat-treating 
temperature ranges may be necessary for some configurations and sizes. 
 

1 
2 
Maximum number of re-solution 
heat treatments permissible 11 
Thickness (inch) 
Under 0.020 
O 
0.020 to 0.125, incl 
Over 0.1 
25 
11 One additional 
re-solution heat treatment is permitted if the 
heating rate is sufficiently 
rapid to keep product in conformance 
to 4.7.3. 

 

I 
Soaking time (mintues) 1/ 
-~ 
~ 
Salt bath 3/ 
Air furnace 4/ 
(max) 
(min) 
(alclad 
only) 5/ 
Thickness (inches) 2/ 
0.016 and under 0.017 to 0.020 incl 
0.021 to 0.032 incl 
0.033 to 0.063 incl 
0.064 to 0.090 incl 
0.091 to 0.124 incl 
0.125 to 0.250 incl 
0.251 to 0.500 incl 
0.501 to 1.000 incl 
1.001 to 1.500 incl 
1.501 to 2.000 incl 
2.001 to 2.500 incl 
2.501 to 3.000 incl 
3.001 to 3.500 incl 3.501 to 4.000 incl 
10 
15 
10 
20 
15 
25 
20 
30 
25 
35 
30 
40 
35 
45 
45 
55 
60 
70 
90 
1 
O0 
105 
115 
120 
130 
135 
160 
150 
175 
165 
190 
(min) 
(alclad 
only) 5/ 
20 
25 
20 
30 
25 
35 
30 
40 
35 
45 
40 
50 
50 
60 
60 
70 
90 
1 
O0 
120 
130 
150 
160 
180 
190 
21 
o 
220 
240 
250 
270 
280 

1/ Longer soaking times may be necessary for specific forgings. Shorter soaking times are 
satisfactory 
when the soak time is accurately determined by thermocouples attached to the 
load or when other metal temperature-measuring 
devices are used. 
2/ The thickness is the minimum dimension of the heaviest 
section. 
3/ Soaking time in salt-bath furnaces begins at time of immersion, except when, owing to a heavy 
charge, the temperature of the bath drops below the specified minimum; in such cases, 
soaking time begins when the bath reaches the specified minimum. 
4/ Soaking time in air furnaces begins when all furnace control instruments indicate recovery to 
the minimum of the process range. 
5/ For alclad metals, the maximum recovery 
time (time between charging furnace and recovery of 
furnace instruments) should not exceed 30 minutes for thicknesses up to 0.050 inch, 
60 minutes for 0.050 inch or greater but less than 0.102 inch, and 120 minutes for 0.102 inch or 
greater. 
 

f
 Cast Alloys 
I 
Allov 
I 
Soaking Time (hours) 
A201 
.O (201) 
and 
A206.0 (206) 
2 at 910 - 930°F 
followed by 
2-8 at 945-965 
followed by 
8-24 at 970-995 
6 to 18 incl 
222.0 (122) 
2 to 10 incl 
6 to 18 incl 
4 to 12 
incl 
6 to 18 incl 
12 
8 hr. then water quench 
to 150-212 
O F  
10 to 12 incl 
6 to 24 incl 
6 to 24 incl 
8 to 24 incl 
10 to 14 incl 
18 
242.0 (142) 295.0 (195) 
296.0 (13295.0) 
31 
9.0 (31 
9) 
328.0 
336.0, 
A336.0 354.0 (354) 
355.0 (355) 
and 
C355.0 (C355) 
356.0 (356) 
and 
A356.0 (A356) 
357.0 (357) 
and 
A357.0 (A357) 
359.0 (359) 
520.0 (220) 

 
                                                                                

Maximum time (seconds) 2/ 
Nominal thickness (inches) 
Up to 0.016 incl 
0.017 to 0.031 incl 
5 7 
0.032 to 0.090 
incl 
0.091 and over 
10 
15 

11 
Quench delay time begins when the furnace door starts to open or when the 
first corner of the load emerges from a salt bath, and ends when the last 
corner o
f
 the load is immersed in the quenchant. With the exception of alloy 
221 
9, the maximum quench delay times may be exceeded (for examples, 
with extremely large loads or long lengths) if performance tests indicate that 
all portions o
f
 the load will be above 775 O F  
when quenched. For alloy 221 
9, 
the maximum quench delay times may be exceeded if performance tests 
indicate all parts will be above 900 O F  
when quenched. 
21 Shorter times than shown may be necessary to ensure that the minimum 
temperature o
f
 71 
78 alloy is above 775 O
F
 when quenched. 
 
                                                                                

Age-Hardening Heat-Treating 
Condition 
Alloy 
Temper 
before 
aging 
Age-hardening 
heat 
Temper 
treatment 1 
/ 
designation 
Limitations 
after 
Metal 
Aging 
temperature 
time 2/ 13/ 
(degrees 
F) 
(hours) 
~ 
Wrought products (excluding 
forgings): 
201 
1 
-W 
Room 
temp. 
96 Minimum 
-T4, -T42 
-T3 
31 
0-330 
14 
-T8 
201 
4 
1-w 
I 
IRoom 
temp. 
196 Minimum 
I -T4, -T42 
I 
-T3 
Iflat sheet 
I31 
0-330 
118 
I 
-T6 
340-360 
10 
-T6, -T62 
340-360 
10 
-T651 
extrusions 
340-360 
10 
-T651 
O 
-T6511 
extrusions 
340-360 
10 
-T4, -T42 3/ -T451 
3/ 
-T451 
O 
-T4511 
2017 
-W 
I 
I 
Room 
term. 
196 Minimum 
I 
- ~ 4  
__ 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-. 
__ 
2024 
-T4 -T451 
-W 
-T3 
Room temp. 
96 Minimum 
-T4, -T42 
sheet and drawn 
365-385 
12 
-T81 
tube 
-T4 
-T3 
wire, rod, bar 
365-385 
12 
-T6 
extrusions 
365-385 
12 
-T81 
3 
6 
5 
- 
3 
8 
5 
1
8
 
I 
-T86 
365-385 
1
9
 
I 
-T62 
365-385 
116 
I 
-T72 
365-385 
-T36 -T42 
-T42 -T42 
wire 
sheet and plate 
sheet only 
other than sheet 
and plate 
sheet and plate 
-T351 
extrusions 
-T351 
O 
-T361 
365-385 
-T851 
-T861 
365-385 
-T851 
O 
365-385 
-Ta51 
1 
-1351 
1 
2048 
21 
17 
Room 
temp. 
96 Minimum 
-T4, -T42 
-W 
-T42 
sheet and plate 
365-385 
9 
-T62 
-T351 
365-385 
12 
-T851 
-W 
wire, rod, bar 
Room 
temp. 
96 Minimum 
-T4 
21 
24 
Room 
temp. 
96 Minimum 
-T4, -T42 
365-385 
9 
-T6 
365-385 
1
9
 
I 
- ~ 6 2  
365-385 
1
1
2
 
                                                                                          

 
                                                                                

indicated 
treatment 
4
1
 
                                                                                          

Alloy 
Age-hardening heat 
Temper 
Temper 
treatment 11 
designation 
before 
Limitations 
after 
aging 
indicated 
treatment 
                                                                                          
6066 
-W 
extrusions 
Room temp. 
96 Minimum 
-T4, -T42 
-T4 
340-360 
8 
-T6 
-T42 
340-360 
8 
-T62 
-T451 
O 
340-360 
8 
-T651 
O 
-T6511 
-T4511 
340-360 
8 

 
~ 

| Metal       | Aging    |
|-------------|----------|
| temperature | time     |
| 21          |          |
| 131         |          |
| (degrees    |          |
| F)          |          |
| (hours)     |          |
| a           |          |
I 
Limitations 
Alloy 
Temper 
before 
aging 
6262 
N 
r4 
Room temp. 
96 Minimum 
-T4 
wire, rod, bar, 
330-350 
8 
-T6 
drawn tube 
330-350 
8 
-T651 
r45i 
r 4  
lextrusions 
1340-360 
1
1
2
 
I 
-T6 
6951 
7001 
                                                                                          
701 
O 
                                                                                          
7039 
I 
1330-350 
1
1
 
5-24 
IT7351 
w 151 
W51 15/ 
W511 
7049, 
71 
49 
sheet 
165-1 
85 
16 
plus 
31 
0-330 
14 
plate 
165-1 
85 
16 
plus 
31 
0-330 
14 
extrusions 
Room temp. 
48 
followed by 
240-260 
24 
I 
followed by 
                                                                                

 

Age-hardening heat 
treatment 11 
Temper 
desianation 
&er 
indicated 
treatment 
Aging 
temperatu 
re 
time 'ìí 131 
(degrees F) 
(hours) 
-T6 
1 
-T64 
-T7651 
O, 
-T76511 
12-1 
4 
48 
-T7351 
O, 
-T73511 19/ 
24-25 
12-21 
320-330 
Room temp. 
followed 
by 
240-260 
followed 
by 
325-335 

Alloy 
Age-hardening heat 
Temper 
Temper 
treatment 11 
designation 
before 
Limitations 
after 
aging 
indicated 
treatment 
Metal 
Aging 
temperature 
time 21 131 
(degrees F) 
(hours) 
4/ 
                                                                                          
-W51 81 
7050 
-W510 
8/ 
-W511 
8/ 
Wrought products (excluding forgings): 
plate 
240-260 
3-6 
plus 
31 
5-335 
12-1 
5 
-T7651 
240-260 
3-6 
plus 
31 
5-335 
24-30 
-T7451 171 
extrusions 
240-260 
3-8 
plus 
31 
5-335 
15-18 
-T7651 
0 
240-260 
3-8 
plus 
-W 81 
wire, rod, rivets 
245-255 
4 min. 
31 
5-335 
15-18 
-T76511 
7075 
-W 7
1
 
-W 51 81 
111 -W 
81 111 
-W 
6/ 
81 
111 
-W 
5/ 
81 
111 
.W 8
1
 111 
.W51 51 
31, 111 
N51 81 
I11 .W51 101 .W51 
6
1
 
3/ 111 
                                                                                          
plus 
350-360 
8 min. 
-T73 
240-260 
24 
-T6, -T62 
sheet and plate 
21 
5-235 
6-8 
plus 
31 
5-335 
24-30 
-T73 
240-260 
3-5 
plus 31 
5-335 
15-18 
-T76 
wire, rod, bar 
2 
1 
5-235 
6-8 
plus 
340-360 
8-1 
O 
--u3 
extrusions 
21 
5-235 
6-8 
plus 
340-360 
6-8 
-T73 
240-260 
3-5 
plus 
31 
0-330 
18-21 
-T76 
plate 
21 
5-235 
6-8 
plus 
31 
5335 
24-30 
-T7351 
240-260 
3-5 
plus 31 
5-335 
15-18 
-T7651 
240-260 
24 
-1651 
wire, rod, bar 
2 
1 
5-235 
6-8 
plus 
340-360 
8-1 
O 
-T7351 

 

Age-Hardening 
Heat-Treating 
Condition - Continued 
Limitations 
Alloy 
Temper 
before 
aging 
I-W511 71 
81 111 
-W510 51 
-W511 51 
81 111 
-W510 51 
81 111 
I-W511 81 
7075 
I-W510 
71 
lextrusions 
240-260 
I24 
I-T651 
0 
240-260 
21 
5-235 
plus 
340-360 
21 
5-235 
plus 
340-360 
240-260 
plus 31 
0-330 
240-260 plus 
3 
1 
0-330 
18-21 
-T76511 
I 
-T6 81 
sheet 
31 
5-335 
24-30 
-T73 
-T6 81 
wire, rod, bar 
340-360 
8-1 
O 
-T73 
-T6 8
1
 
extrusions 
340-360 
6-8 
-T73 
31 
0-330 
1 
8-21 
-T76 
I-T651 
81 
I 
piate 
131 
5-335 
124-30 
1 -T7351 
wire, rod, bar 
340-360 
(8-10 
1 -T735 
1 
extrusions 
340-360 
16-8 
1
0
 
-T7351 
-T651 8
1
 
-T651 
O 81 
I-T6511 
81 
I 
~ 
31 
0-330 
118-21 
1 -T765 
1 
0 
340-360 
16-8 
1 -T73511 
I31 
0-330 
I l  
8-21 
147651 
1 
71 
50 
W51 
O, 
W511 
extrusions 
W51 
plate 
                                                                                          
12 
24 
-T6, -T62 
3-5 
7178 
-W 
-W 81 111 
sheet 
2 
4 
O 
- 
2 
6 
O 
plus 
31 
0-330 
240-260 plus 300-320 
240-260 240-260 
plus 
-w 8/ 111 
31 
5335 
15-1 
8 
-T76 
extrusions 
240-260 
3-5 
plus 
31 
0-330 
18-21 
-T76 

 
                                                                                

Temper 
designation 
Age-hardening heat 
treatment 1 
I 
aier 
indicated 
treatment 
temperature 
time 2/ 131 
(degrees F) 
(hours) 
-T6511 
24 
6-8 
6-8 
47351 
O 
6-8 6-8 
-T73511 
3-5 
18-21 
-T7651 
0 
3-5 
8 
-T651 
O, 
4-6 201 
-T6511 
24 
T651 
Age-hardening heat 
treatment i/ 
Alloy 
Temper 
before 
aging 
Limitations 
Temper 
designation 
after 
indicated 
treatment 
Metal 
Aging 
temperature 
time 2/ 13/ 
(degrees F) 
(hours) 
4 
Wrought products (excluding 
forgings): 
7
1
 
7
8
 
                                                                                          
7475 
                                                                                          
7
4
7
5
 
Alclad 
Forgings: 

 

Temper 
before 
aging 
Alloy 
Limitations 
Forainas: 
4032 
6053 
6061 
6066 
                                                                                          
61 
51 
7049 
W 
,W52 
die & hand 
forgings Room temp. 
followed 
by 
followed 
by 
240-260 
320-330 
die forgings 
,W 
7050 
240-260 
plus 
340-360 
240-260 
,W52 
1 
hand 
forgings 
                                                                                          
7075 
.W 
.W 81 111 
plus 340-360 
6-8 
-T7452 181 
2 
4 
O 
- 
2 
6 
O 
24 
-T6 
21 
5-235 
6-8 
plus 340-360 
8-10 
-T73 
hand forgings 
240-260 
24 
-T652 
-W52 -w52 
al 
111 
-W51 
21 
5-235 
6-a 
plus 
340-360 
6-8 
-T7352 
rolled rings 
21 
5-235 
6-8 
plus 
7076 
die & hand forgings 
w 
-W 
I die & hand 
forgings 
                                                                                

 

| Age-hardening    | heat     |
|------------------|----------|
| treatment 11     |          |
| Temper           |          |
| designation      |          |
| after            |          |
| indicated        |          |
| treatment        |          |
| Metal            | Aging    |
| temperature      | time     |
| 2                | 1        |
| 131              |          |
| (degrees         |          |
| F)               | (hours)  |
| 41               |          |
| 48               |          |
| 24               | -T73,    |
| -T7352           |          |
| 10-16            |          |
| 3-6              |          |
| 6-12             | -T74 161 |
| 3-6              |          |
| 340-360          | -T7351   |
| 2                | 1        |
| 340-360          | -T74 16/ |
| 265-285          |          |
| -T6              |          |
Temper 
Alloy 
before 
aging 
Age-hardening heat 
Temper 
treatment 11 
designation 
Li 
mitations 
after 
Metal 
Aging 
temperature 
(degrees F) 
(hours) 
4
1
 
7149 
242.0 
(1 
42) 
(195) 
295.0 296.0 
(B295.0) 
319.0 
(31 
9) 
328.0 
(Red 
X-8) 
333.0 
(333) 
336.0 
(A332.0) 
354.0 
(354) 
355.0 
(355) 
and 
C355.0 
(C355) 
-F 
-T4 
-T4 
-T4 -T4 -T4 
430-450 
7-9 
-T51 
300-320 
1-6 
-T6 
300-320 
10-12 
-T61 
330-350 
14-18 
-T62 
430-450 
3-5 
-T7 
465-485 
4-6 
-U1 

 
                                                                                

indicated 
treatment 
time 2/ 131 
                                                                                          
Alloy 
Limitations 
Temper 
before 
aging 
356.0 
T4 
F 
T4 
T4 
430-450 
6-1 
2 
-T51 
300-320 
1-6 
-T6 
300-320 
6-1 
O 
-T61 
(356) 
and 
A356.0 
(A3561 
,T4 
300-340 
2-1 
2 
-T6 
.T4 
I 
1300-320 
18-12 
I 
-T61 
357.0 
(357) 
and 
A357.0 
(357) 
359.0 
(3591 
                                                                                          
.T41 .T4 
.T4 
1 
-W 
330-350 
6-1 
O 
-T62 
3 
O 
O 
- 
3 
2 
O 
20-1 
2 
-T6 
1 
330-350 
6-1 
O 
-T62 
200-220 
10 
-T5 
or Room 
21 days 
temp. 
300-320 
3-5 
-T5 
-F 
707.0 
(607) 
or Room 
21 days 
temp. 
345-365 
9-1 
1 
-T5 
-F 
or Room 
21 days 
712.0 
(D712.0) 
-F 
-F 
713.0 
(613) 
Room temp. 
240-260 
or Room 
tem. 
850.0 
420-440 
(750) 
I 
-F 
420-440 
851 
.O 
(A850.0) 
852.0 
(B850.0) 
I 
1420-40 
-F 

1/ 
To produce 
the stress-relieved 
tempers, metal 
which has been solution heat-treated 
in accordance with Table II 
(-W temper) must be stretched 
or compressed 
as required 
before 
aging. In instances 
where a multiple 
stage aging 
treatment is used, the metal may be, but need not be, removed 
from the furnace and cooled between 
aging steps. 
2l 
The time at temperature will depend on time required 
for load 
to reach 
temperature. The times shown are based on rapid 
heating 
with soaking time measured 
from the time the load reached 
the minimum 
temperature shown. 
3/ 
Alternate 
treatment o
f
 18 hours at 305 to 330°F may be used 
for sheet and plate. 
 
~ 

| Age-hardening    | heat    |
|------------------|---------|
| treatment        |         |
| 1/               |         |
| 1                |         |
| designation      |         |
| &er              |         |
| indicated        |         |
| treatment        |         |
| Metal            | Aging   |
| temperature      |         |
| time             |         |
| 2i               |         |
| 131              |         |
| (degrees         | F)      |
| (hours)          |         |
| 96 Minimum       | -T1     |
| 16               | -T5     |
| 21 days          |         |
| 7-9              | -T5     |
| 7-9              |         |
| -T5              |         |

## Ams-H-6088 Sae

4
1
 
When the interval 
of the specified 
temperature range exceeds 20 OF, 
any 20 O F  
temperature range (or 30 O
F
 range for 
6061) within the entire range may be utilized provided 
that no exclusions or qualifying criteria are cited herein or in 
the 
applicable material 
specification. 
51 
Altemate treatment of 6 to 8 hours at 215 to 235 O F  
followed by a second stage of 14 
to 18 hours at 325 
to 345 O
F
 may be 
used providing 
a heating-up rate of 25 O F  
per hour is used. 
Alternate treatment of 10 to 14 hours at 340 to 360 O
F
 may be used providing a heating-up 
rate of 25 O
F
 per hour is used. 
61 71 
For extrusions an altemate three-stage treatment comprised of 5 hours at 200 to 220 
O
F
 followed by 4 hours at 
240 to 260 "F followed 
by 4 hours at 290 to 310 O
F
 may be used. 
8
l
 
                                                                                          
The aging of aluminum alloys 7049,7050,7075, and 7178 from any temper to the Ti' type tempers requires closer control on aging practice variables such as time, temperature, heating-up rates, etc, for any given item. In addition to the above, when re-aging material in the T6 temper series to the T7 type temper series, the specific condition of the T6 temper material (such as its property level and other effects of processing variables) is extremely important and will affect the capability of the re-aged material to conform to requirements specified for the applicable T7 type tempers. 

Old or former commercial designation is shown in parentheses. 

91 
1 
O1 
For plate, an altemate treatment of 4 hours at 195 to 21 
5 O F  
followed by a second stage of 8 hours at 305 to 325 O
F
 may 
be used. 
111 
With respect to -T73, -77351, -77351 
O, -T73511, -77352, -l76, 
-i7651 
O, and -T76511 
tempers, a license 
has been 
granted to the public under US. 
Patent 3,198,676 and these times and temperatures are those generally recommended 
by the patent 
holder. Counterpart patents exist in several countries other than the United States. Licenses to operate 
under these counterpart patents should be obtained 
from the patent holder. 
A heating-up rate of 50 to 75 O F  
per hour is recommended. 
12/ 
1 
31 
The 96-hour minimum 
aging time required for each alloy listed with temper designation 
W is not necessary if artificial 
aging is to be employed 
to obtain tempers other than that derived 
from room temperature aging. (For example, natural 
aging (96 hours) to achieve the -T4 or -T42 temper for 2014 alloy is not necessary prior 
to artificial aging 
to obtain a -T6 
or -T62 temper.) 
An altemate treatment comprised of 8 hours at 350 O
F
 also may be used. 

1 
41 
A heating-up rate of 35 O F  
per hour from 135 O
F
 is recommended. 
1 
51 
                                                                                          

Formerly designated as Ti36 
temper. 
1 
61 
Formerly designated 
as i73651 
temper. 
1 
71 
Formerly designated 
as T73652 temper. 
1 
81 
Longer times are to be used 
with section thicknesses less than 2 inches. 
1 
91 
Soak time of 4 hours for extrusions with leg 
thickness less than 0.8 inch 
and 6 hours for extrusions having 
thicker legs. 
201 
An aitemative treatment is to omit the first stage and heat at a rate no greater than 36 "Fhour. 
21 
I 
Doesn't require 
the 14-day room temperature age. 
22/ 
 

Material 
Inter- 
Tests 
granular 
Diffusion 
corrosion 
(alclad 
Mechanical 
properties 
11 
only) 
2/ 
Melting 
and 
hydrogen 
porosity 
51 
X 31 
X 4
1
 
X 
?late, sheet 
and 
rxtrusions 
__ 
__ 
X 
Castings 
X 31 
-- 
X 
X 
Bar, rod and wire 
X 
-- 
-- 
X 
Forgings 
X 
X 
Tubing 
-- 
X 
X 
_- 
X 
X 
Rivets & 
fastener 
components 
1 
/ Those specified 
in the applicable material specification. 
2/ Applicable only to bare or alclad 2XXX series (unaged) and 7XXX alloy series. 
                                                                                          
31 Required only for metal under 0.250 inch thick. 4/ Not required for metal under 0.020 inch thick. 
51 Melting and hydrogen porosity resulting from solution heat treatment. 

 
                                                                                

Brinell, 3/ 
typical 
Temper 
B 
Hardness 
and Electrical Conductivity vs Temper li 7
1
 
conductivity 
51 
E 
H 
2/ 
minimum 
Alloy 
Rockwell, 
îypical minimum 
4
1
,
 61 
I 
Tvpical 
1100 
I 
o 
I 
I 
50 tmx 
95 tmx 
~~ 
2014 
57.0 - 62.0 
43.5 - 51.5 
31.5 - 35.0 
31.5 - 35.0 
86 
35.0 - 41.5 
95 tmx 
2024 
                                                                                          
82 
82 
84 
85 
2048 
110 
120 
95 tmx 
27.5 - 32.5 
_i-- 
35.0 - 42.5 
4
4
.
0
 
- 49.0 
98 
1 
O0 
1 
O0 
110 
115 
69 
74 
22 tmx 
60 
62 58 62 71 
O 
22 tmx 6
1
 
T3 
1 
O0 
65 
T4 
1 
O
0
 
65 
T6 
125 
78 
O 
22tmx 
T3 
110 
69 
T4 
1 
O0 
63 
T6 
125 
72 
T8 
120 
74 
T8 
120 
72 
T3 T8 
O 
T3 T37 
T4 
T6 T8 
79 81 
78 81 83 
84 
70 tmx 
95 
95 
102 
70 tmx 
94 
94 
98 
99 98 97 99 
70 tmx 
92 
93 
90 93 98 
1 
O0 
3003 
5052 
26.0 - 31 
.O 
27.0 - 31 
.O 
28.0 - 32.0 
32.0 - 36.0 
31 
.O - 35.0 
! 31.0 - 35.0 
44.5 - 50.5 
34.0 - 37.0 
65 tmx 
95 tmx 
- 
70 tmx 61 
90 tmx 
T87 
125 
75 
O 
O 
6013 
46.0 - 51 
.
O
 
27.5 - 32.5 
27.5 - 3
4
.
0
 
34.0 - 4
4
.
0
 
35.0 - 42.5 
I 35.0 -42.5 
1 
96 
75 tmx 
6061 
O 
T4 
40 
T6 
61 
O 
40 tmx 61 
T4 
50 
T6 
80 
42 
60 
85 
64 
78 
70 tmx 
53 
54 
57 
37.0 - 39.0 
40.0 - 43.0 
42.0 - 50.0 
35.5 - 43.0 
40.0 - 50.0 
57.0 - 65.0 
48.0 - 5
8
.
0
 
48.0 - 58.0 
50.0 - 60.0 
6063 
I 
O 
I 
I 
37 40 
44 
70 
50.0 - 60.0 
42.0 - 47.0 
40 tmx 
85 
95 
3
4
.
0
 
- 41 
.O 
I 38.0 - 50.0 
Hardness and Electrical 
Conductivity vs Temper 1/ - Continued 
~ 
Rockwell, typical minimum 
4
1
,
 61 
I 
Typical 
Temper 
Alloy 
6 
E 
H 
1 
5T 
c0nd;ctivity 
5/ 
Brinell, 3/ 
typical 
minimum 
701 
O 
22 tmx 
85 82 
70 tmx 
95 tmx 
4
4
.
0
 
- 50.0 
104 
85 
40.0 - 44.0 
105 
86 
40.0 - 44.0 
134 
140 142 
84 
22 tmx 61 
7049 
106 
87 
39.0 - 4
4
.
0
 
70 tmx 61 
95 tmx 61 
4
4
.
0
 
- 50.0 
135 
7050 
81 
22 tmx 6/ 
81 
82 
                                                                                          
135 
135 
140 
7075 
135 
125 
130 
140 
7149 
71 
50 
104 
85 
40.0 - 44.0 
70 tmx 61 
95 tmx 61 
44.0 
- 50.0 
104 
85 
41 
.O - 44.0 
105 
86 
40.0 - 44.0 
84 
22 tmx 61 
106 
87 
39.0 - 44.0 
70 tmx 6/ 
95 tmx 61 
4
4
.
0
 
- 48.0 
84 
78 
82 
84 
22 tmx 
87 
81 
82 
84 
145 
135 
135 
140 
95 tmx 6/ 
71 
78 
145 
140 
87 
84 
7475 
O 
T3 
T4 
T6 
O 
T73 
O 
T73 
T74 101 
T76 
O 
T6 
T73 
T76 
T76 
O 
T61 
T73 
T74 T76 
O 
T6 
T76 
T73 
T76 
106 
87 
30.5 - 36.0 
102 
85 
40.0 - 43.0 
1 
04 
86 
38.0 - 42.0 
106 
87 
38.0 - 44.0 
70 tmx 
95 tmx 
4
4
.
0
 
- 50.0 
108 
29.0 - 33.5 
104 
85 
41 
.O - 44.0 
105 
86 
40.0 - 44.0 
106 
87 
39.0 - 44.0 
43.0 - 47.0 
108 
88 
29.0 - 34.0 
106 
87 
38.0 - 42.0 
103 
40.0 - 44.5 
105 
38.0 - 42.0 

NOTE: Refer to notes at end of Table X. 

Values, Electrical 
Conductivity vs Temper 11 
Rockwell, typical minimum 41 
Alloy 
Temper 
2/ 
15T 
E 
B 
Typical 
conductivity 
5/ 
Sheet 
thickness 
(inches) 9/ 
T6 
2014 
85 
- 
76 
75 
.O62 & Under 
.O63 & Over 
102 
1 
o1 
35.5 - 44.0 35.5 - 44.0 
T3 
79 
2024 
- 
T4 
79 
- 
82 
T6 
- 
.O62 & Under 
.O63 & Over 
.O62 & Under 
.O63 & Over 
.O62 & Under 
.O63 & Over 
All 
82 
57 60 57 60 
60 
62 
65 
91 
93 91 93 93 94 97 
T8 
28.5 - 35.0 
28.5 - 35.0 
28.5 - 35.0 
28.5 - 35.0 
35.0 - 45.0 
35.0 - 45.0 
35.0 - 45.0 
80 
T6 
- 
221 
9 
71 
82 
T8 
- 
.O62 & Under .O63 & Over 
.O62 & Under 
.O63 & Over 
61 60 64 63 
92 91 96 95 
32.0 - 37.0 
32.0 - 37.0 
31 
.O - 37.0 
31 
.O - 37.0 
- 
74 
All 
T6 
84 
6061 
40.0 - 47.0 
1 6  
.O32 & Under 
7075 
.O33 
- .O62 
86 
- 
- 
T76 
.O63 & Over 
.O32 
& Under 
.O33 - .O62 
84 
- - 
.O63 & Over 
78 
76 
75 
76 75 74 
103 102 
1 
o1 
102 
1 
o1 
1 
O0 
30.5 - 36.0 
30.5 - 36.0 
30.5 - 36.0 
38.0 - 42.0 
38.0 - 42.0 
38.0 - 42.0 
71 
78 
T6 
.O36 & Under 
79 
                                                                                          
.O37 - .O62 
86 
- 
- 
.O63 & Over 
76 
78 
104 
103 1 
o2 
29.0 - 3
4
.
0
 
29.0 - 37.0 
29.0 - 37.0 

 

11 This table i
s
 for information purposes only. Electrical conductivity measurements may be 
influenced by the operating characteristics o
f
 the instrument probe used. 
21 Only the basic temper, TX(X), i
s
 shown. Hardness values also apply to the stress relieved 
TX51 
, 
TX52, TX54, TX510, or TX511 conditions and the user heat treated T42 and T62 
conditions. 
31 BHN, 500 Kg load, 10 mm ball. 
4/ Hardness values for the annealed (O) 
conditions are typical maximum; all other hardness 
values are typical minimum. The 15T values are for material 0.032 inch or **less** in thickness 
and may be used for the thinnest material that does not show anvil effect. 
51 Typical conductivity as expressed by percentage o
f
 conductivity of the International Annealed 
Copper Standard (IACS). 
61 Tmx i
s
 the abbreviation for typical maximum. 
71 Electrical conductivity i
s
 not as sensitive a n  indicator as hardness testing for metallurgical 
conditions that affect strength in alloy 221 
9. 
81 For the annealed (O temper), the non-clad values are applicable. 
91 Values are for sheet with clad intact. For alclad sheet over 0.091 inch thick, incorrect 
hardness readings can result from the cladding thicknesses. Partial removal o
f
 the cladding 
thickness in local areas i
s
 permitted to obtain valid hardness readings. 
1 
O/ 
Formerly designated as Ti36 temper. 
 
                                                                                

Alloy 
Approximate 
time at 
temperatu 
re, 
hours 
Approximate Il 
time at 
temperature, 
hours 
II 
Metal 
temperature 
degrees 
F 
31 
Metal 
temperature 
degrees 
F 3
1
 
2/ 
2/ 
2/ 
2 - 3 2 - 3  
2 - 3 2 - 3  
2 - 3 2 - 3  
21 
2/ 
2/ 
21 21 
21 
21 
2/ 
1060 1100 
1350 
2014 201 
7 
2024 
2036 21 
1
7
 
221 
9 
3003 3004 31 
05 
5005 5050 5052 
5056 5083 
650 
650 650 760 
4
1
 
760 
4
1
 
760 
4
1
 
725 
4
1
 
760 
4
1
 
760 
4
1
 
775 
650 650 650 
650 650 
650 650 
5086 51 
54 
5254 5454 5456 5457 
5652 6005 
601 
3 
6053 6061 6063 
6066 
7001 7075 
7
1
 
75 
7
1
 
78 
650 
650 650 650 
650 650 
650 
760 
4
1
 
775 
4
1
 
760 
4
1
 
760 
4
1
 
760 
4
1
 
760 
4
1
 
760 
5
1
 
760 
5
1
 
760 
5
1
 
760 
5
1
 
2
1
 
2/ 
2
1
 
2
1
 
2
1
 
2
1
 
2/ 
2 - 3 2 - 3  
2 - 3 2 - 3 2 - 3  
2 - 3 2 - 3  
2 - 3  
2 - 3  
2 - 3  

11 This table is for information purposes only. 

2/ Time in furnace should be no longer than necessary to get center of load to the desired 
temperature, taking into consideration 
the thickness or diameter of metal. Rate of cooling is 
unimportant. 
3
1
 Metal temperature variation in the annealing furnace should be not greater than +1 O 
O F ,  
-15 
O F .  
4
1
 This annealing removes the effects o
f
 the solution heat treatment. Cooling rate must be 50 
O F  
per hour from annealing 
temperature to 500 
O F .  The rate of subsequent cooling is unimportant. 
                                                                                          
5
1
 This annealing removes the effects of the solution heat treatment by cooling at an uncontrolled 
rate in the air to 400 
O F  
or less followed by a reheating to 450 
O F  
for 4 
hours and cooling at room 
atmosphere conditions. 
 
                                                                                          

 per end plus.one fron center as shown In fleure 2
C,' For plate thicknesses over 1.0 inch, total nunber o f  samples fron 
(5 per end plus one fron center as shown h fgurc 2
)
.
NOTEI 
Directions of rollno Is perpendtcular t o  the above plate sections. 
rdllng widths o f  plates ore shown. 
Finish 
 

AMs-H-6088 
SAE 
AMs-H-6088 

## Index - Continued

| 6.5.5                 | Blistering                |
|-----------------------|---------------------------|
|                       |                           |
| .26                   |                           |
| 6.5.6                 | Authorized Representative |
|                       |                           |
| .26                   |                           |
| 6.5.7                 |                           |
| Cognizant Engineering | Activity                  |
|                       |                           |
| 26                    |                           |
| 6.6                   | Patent Notice             |
|                       |                           |
| 27                    |                           |
|                       |                           |

 

## Index Of Tables And Figures

Pages 
Table I 
Inspection requirements 
..................................................................................................... 28 
II 
Solution heat-treating 
temperatures ................................................................................... 
29 
III 
Re-solution 
heat treatment of alclad alloys ........................................................................ 
35 
IV 
Recommended 
soaking time for solution heat treatment of wrought products .................. 
36 
V 
Recommended soaking time for solution treatment of cast alloys ..................................... 
37 
VI 
Maximum quench delay (for immersion quenching) .......................................................... 
38 
VI 
I 
Recommended age-hardening heat-treating 
condition 
...................................................... 
39 
V
I
1
1
 
Test requirements for periodic monitoring 
.......................................................................... 
49 
IX 
Aluminum alloys (non-clad), typical values, hardness and electrical 
conductivity 
vs 
. 
temper ....................................................................................................... 50 
X 
Aluminum alloys (alclad), heat.treated, typical values, electrical conductivity 
vs . 
temper .......................................................................................................................... 
52 
XI 
Recommended 
annealing conditions 
for wrought aluminum and 
aluminum alloys ................................................................................................................. 
54 
                                                                                          
Figure 1 
Tension test sample location for spray quench equipment verification 
.............................. 
55 
Figure 2 
Allowable location 
to sample tension specimen 
from approximate location 
of center of plate ................................................................................................................ 
56 
                                                                                          

 
                                                                                