
## (Magnetic Compass)

1. PURPOSE: 
To. specify minimum requirements fO.r non-stabilized magnetic directioJ;l 
instruments for use in aircraft, the operation of which m~ 
subject the instrument to the environmental conditions specified in Paragraph 3.3. 
2. 
SCOPE: 
This Aeronautical Standard covers two basic types of instruments as 
follows: 

Type I 
Type II 
-
Direct Reading 
.. Remote Indicating 

## . 3. General Requirements:

3.1 Material and Workmanship: 
--`,,```````,`,,`,``,``,,,,`,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
3.1.1 Materials: Materials shall be of a quality which experience and/or tests 
have demonstrated to be suitable and dependable for use in aircraft i~stru­
ments. 
3.1.2 Workmanship: Workmanship shall be cQnsistent with high-grade aircraft 
instrument manufacturing practice. 
3.2 Identification: The following information shall be legibly and permanently 
mark 
ed on the instrument or at 
tached thereto: . 
(a) 
Name of Instrument 
(b) Aeronautical Standard AS 398A 
(c) Manufacturer's part number 
- 
(d) Manufacturer's seriai number or date of manufacture 
(e) Manufacturer's name and/or trademark 
(f) Rating, if applicable (Electrical, Vacuum, etc.) 
The following conditions have been established as Tests shall be conducted as specified in Sections 

3.3 Environmental Conditions: 
aesign requirements only. 
5, 6 and 7. 
3.3.1 Tempe!ature: When installed in accordance with the instrument manufacturer's 
instructions, the instrmnent shall function over the range of ambient temperature shown in Column It. belm'l and shall not be adversely affected by 
exposure to the range of temperature shown in Column B below: 

| Instrument                  | Location      |
|-----------------------------|---------------|
| A                           |               |
| B                           |               |
| Heated Areas (Temperature   | Controlled)   |
| Unheated Areas (Temperature | Uncontrolled) |
| -                           | 30            |
| to                          |               |
| 50c                         |               |
| -                           | 55            |
| to                          |               |
| 70C                         |               |
| -                           | 65            |
| to                          |               |
| 700                         |               |
| -                           | 65            |
| to                          |               |
| 700                         |               |

3.).2 Humiditl: The instrument shall function and shall not be adversely affected 
when exposed to any relative humidity in the range from 0 to 95% at a temperature of approximately 32C. 
3.3.3 Vibration: When installed in accordance with the instrument manufacturer's 
instructrons, the instruments shall function and shall not be adversely affected when subjected to vibX'8.tiona of the following characteristics: 

| Instrument     | Location    |
|----------------|-------------|
| Cycles         |             |
| Max.           |             |
| Double         | Max.        |
| in             | Airframe    |
| Per            | Sec.        |
| Amplitude      | (Inches)    |
| Ac             | celer'ation |
| --             |             |
| Power          | Plant       |
| 5 - 150        |             |
| 0.100          |             |
| 20g            |             |
| Wings          | and         |
| 5 - 500        |             |
| 0.0)6          |             |
| 109            |             |
| Fuselage       |             |
| 5 -            |             |
| 500            |             |
| 0.0)6          |             |
| 5g             |             |
| Panel          | or          |
| 5 - 50         |             |
| 0.020          |             |
| 1.5g           |             |
| Shoclanounts ) |             |

3.3.4 Altitude: 
The instrument shall function and shall not be adversely affected 
when subjected to a pressure and temperature range equivalent from -1000 
feet to 40,000 feet standard altitude per NACA Report 1235, except as 
limited b.1 application of Paragraph 3.3.1. The inst~nnent shall not be adversely affected when subjected to a pressure of 50 in. Hg. absolute. 
3.4 Radio Interference: The instrument shall not be the source of objectionable 
interference, under operating conditions at any frequencies used on aircraft 
either qy radiation or feed-back, in radio equipment installed in the same 
aircraft as the instrument. 
3.5 Magnetic Effect: 
The magnetic effect of the instrument shall not adversely 
affect the operation of other instruments installed in the same aircraft. 

## 4. Detail Requirements: •

4.1 Indicating Method: 
One of the following methods of indication shall be 
employed: 

|             |      |       |      |       | Method    | I     |
|-------------|------|-------|------|-------|-----------|-------|
| Horizontal  | drum | dial  | with | fixed | lubber's  | line. |
| Graduations |      |       |      |       |           |       |
| move        |      |       |      |       |           |       |
| to          | the  | right | for  | right | turns.    |       |
| Method      | II   |       |      |       |           |       |
| Rotating    | vertical    | dial              | with      | fixed     | lubber's    | line.    |
|-------------|-------------|-------------------|-----------|-----------|-------------|----------|
| Dial        | rotates     | counter-clockwise | for       | right     | turns.      |          |
| Method      | III         |                   |           |           |             |          |
| Rotating    | pointer     | with              | fixed     | graduated | dial.       |          |
| Pointer     | rotates     | clockwise         | for       | right     | turns.      | Dial     |
| position    | may         | be                | settable. |           |             |          |

4.2 Operating Limits: 
During straight flight the instrument shall indicate 
magnetic headings, throughout the 360 degree scale range, during dives, 
climbs or banks up to at least 20 degrees displacement from level flight. 
4.3 Dial Markings: 
4.3.1 
Graduations: 
The indicators shall be provided with degree graduations at 
intervals not to exceed 5 degrees, with major graduations every 10 degrees 
and with numerical markings at intervals not greater than 30 degrees, 
except that the 0, 90, 180 and 210 degree positions shall be marked N, E, 
Sand *\01* respeciii 
vely 
- 
Visibility: Index and dial markings shall be visible from ~ 
point within 
-the frustum of a cone the side of ,which'makes an angle of 30 degrees with the perpendicular to the dial and the small diameter of 'Hhich is the aTIOl'ture of the instrument case. At least two numerals shall be simult.aneot\sly visible. 

4.3.3 Finish: Unless otherwise specified b,y the user, matte white material shall 
be applied to major graduations, numerals and pointers. Non-functional surfaces shall be a durable dull black. 
h.!1 PO'ier Variations: All units shall properly' function with + 15% variation in 
n.c. voltage and/or + 10% variation in A.C. voltage and a '+ 5% frequency 
variation. 
-
-
-
4.5 ComPensation Provisions: Means shall be provided for compensating for semicirCular deviation. Compensating effect shall be between 15 and 40 degrees 
in each direction for each axis when adjusted for maximum effect. 
4.6 Power Malfunction Indication: Means shall be incorporated in the instrument 
to indicate When adequate power (VOltage and/or current) is not being made 
available to all phases required for the proper operation of the instrument. 
The indicating means shall indicate a failure or a malfunction in a positive 
manner. 

## 5. Test Condittons:

Atmospheric Conditions: Unless otherwise speoified, all tests required b,y this Aeronautic81 Standard shall be conducted at an atmospheric pressure of approximately 29.92 inches of mercury, at an ambient temperature of approximately 250 and at a relative humidity of not greater than 85 percent. When tests are conducted with atmospheric pressure or temperature substantially different from these values, allowance shall be made for the variations from the specified conditions. 

Vibration (to minimize friction): Unless otherwise specified, all tests for performance may be conducted with the instrument subjected to a vibration of 
0.002 to 0.005 inch double amplitude at a frequency of 1500 to 2000 cycles per minute. 

The term double amplitude as used herein indicates the total displacement from positive maximum to negative maximum. 

5.3 Vibration EquiE.ment~ Vibration equipment shall be used which will provide 
frequencies and amplitudes consistent with the requirements of Paragraph 3.3.3 
with the following charac~eristics~ 
--`,,```````,`,,`,``,``,,,,`,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---

5.3.1 Linear Motio~ Vibration: Vibration equipment shall be such as to allow 
rlbi'ation to be applied along each of three mutually perpendicular axes 
of the instrument. 
5.3.2 Circular Motion Vibration: Vibration equipment shall be such that a point 
on the instrument case will describe a circle ina plane inclined 45 degrees 
to the horizontal' plane, the diameter of which is equal to the double 
amplitude speoified. 
5.4 Power Conditionsr Unless otherwise speoified, all tests shall be oonducted 
at the power rating reoommended by the manufacturer. 
5.5 Position: Unless otherwise specified, all tests shall be made with the 
instrument (indic 
ators, amplifiers, transmitters, etc.) mounte4 in their 
normal operating position. 
5.6 Magnetic Field Strength: Unless otherwise specified, all tests required b.1 
this Aeronautioal Standard shall be made with a horizontal field strength of 
approximately 0.18 gauss and a vertioal field strength of approximately 0.54 
gauss., in the direction normal in the. 
northern hemisphere. When tests are 
made with field strength values substantially different from these values, 
allowance shall be made for variations from the speoified tolerances. 
5.7 Compensators: Unless otherwise speoified, all tests shall be made with 
magnetic compensators removed or adjusted to neu~ral position. 
6. 
INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS: 
All instruments shall be subjected to 
whatever tests the manufaoturer deems necessary to demonstrate specified 
compliance with this Aeronautical Standard inoluding the following requirements where applicable. 
6.1 Leakag,e: Liquid-filled indicators or transmitters shall not show evidence of 
leaKage after having been placed in a bell jar and subjected to a pressure 
equivalent to 40,000 feet standard altitude for a period of 1 hour. 
--`,,```````,`,,`,``,``,,,,`,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---
6.2 .Scale Error: 
When the magnetic-sensitive unit is placed on magnetic headings 
at 30 degree intervals starting from North the indioated headings shall corresp6nd to actual magnetic headings within 4 degrees. 
Friction: When the magnetic element has been defl~oted 5 degrees first to right and then to left, from its equilibrium position and then allowed to come to rest, the differenoe between the two indicator readings at rest shall not exoeed'l degree. 

Damping 
I 
When the magnetic element has been deflected 30 degrees first to the 
6.h 
right and to the left, from its 'equilibrium position, the time required for 
the indicator dial (or pointer) to pass through the 25 degree angle toward the original indicated heading shall not exceed 5.0 seconds or be less than 
1.0 seconds. The maximum overawing past the original indicated heading shall 
not exceed 15 degrees. 

L... 
    __ 
        !-----------.. 
                                                    ,. , 
                                                        ... ,., ............ ".,.,' ,~.-. -----------------1 

Heeling Error: When the magnetic-sensitive unit is tilted 20 degrees from the norm8l level position the magnetic element shall be free to rotate through 360 degrees. When the unit is tilted 10 degrees the indicated heading shall not differ from the indicated hea~ng with.the mag~etic-sensitive 
-unit in normal level position b.Y more than 4 degrees. The indicator dial 
(or pointer) shall still be visible as specified in Paragraph 4.).2. 

6.6 
Swirl: '\fuen the magnetic-sensitive unit is tilted 20 degrees from normal 
and rotated in azimuth, at a rate of 30 degrees per second, through 360 
degrees, stopping at N, S, E and W 
indication, the overswing of the indicator dial (or pointer) at each of these points shall not exceed 6 degrees. 
Compensation: With the magnetic-sensitive unit on N heading and the compensator adjusted for minimum effect, the scale error with the compensator shall not differ from the scale error without compensator qy more than 2 degrees. 

The maximum adjustable compensation effect shall be between 15 and 40 degrees in each direction for each axis. 

When the magnetic-se.nsitive unit is placed on any cardinal heading and t.he opposite axis compensator adjusted for maximum effect the indicated heading shall not change more than 2 degrees. 

6.8 Dielectric: Ungrounded instruments or grounded instruments prior to connection of internal ground wire, shall be tested by either the method of 
inspection of Paragraph 6.8.1 and 6.8.2. 
6.8.1 Insulation Resistance: 
The insulation resistance measured at 500 volts D.C. 
(200 volts for hermetically sealed, inert gas filled instruments) between' 
all electrical circuits cormected together and the metallic case shall not 
be less than 20 megohms. 
6.8.2 Dielectric Strength: The insulation shall withstand without evidence of 
damage the application of a· sinusoid~ voltage at a commercial frequency 
between all electrical circuits cormeoted together and the metallic case, 
for a period of five seconds. The RMS value of the sinusoidal voltage 
applied shall be either five (5) times the maximtnn instrument operating 
voltage, or 500 volts, whichever is lower, except that on hermetically 
sealed, (inert gas filled instruments) the test voltage shall be 200 
volts RMS. 
6.'8.2.1 Instruments having a permanent internal ground connection shall be 
tested as follows, 
The insulation shall withstand without evidence of dama.ge the application of a sinusoidal voltage at a commercial frequency between each electric circuit and the metallic case, for a period of five (5) seconds. The RMS value of the sinusoidal voltage applied shall be 1.25 times the maximum circuit operating voltage obtainable between the test points 
- 

7. 
QUALIFIOATION TESTS: 
.As marw instruments as deemed necessary to demonstrate 
that Sl1 instruments Will oomply with the requirements of this seotion shall 
be tested in aooordance with the manufacturer's reoommendations. 
7.1 Low T~erature: The instruments, or oomponents" shall be subjeoted to the 
temperatures indicated in the. following table in aocordance with their 
location in the airoraft. After exposure to these temperatures for 5 hours, 
. rated performance shall be obtained in 15 minutes after application of rated 
power using themagneti~ field strength specified in Paragraph 5.6 except 
the field strength tolerance shall be ! 20%. 

Temperature 
Instrument Location 
Heated Area (Temperature Controlled) 
Unheated Area (Temperature Uncontrolled) 
-30C 
-55c 

1.2 High Temperature: 
Th~ requirements of Paragraph 1.1 shall apply exoept that 
the exposure temperatures shall be 50C for heated areas and 700 for unheated 
areas and rated performance. shall be obtained in 3 minutes after application 
of rated power. 
7.3 Extreme Temperature Exposure: 
The instrument, or components, shall, after 
alternate exposures to ambient temperatures of -650 and 100 for periods of 
24 hours each and del~ 
of 3 hours at room temperature following completion 
of the exposure, meet the requirements of Paragraph 6.1 and 6.2. There 
shall be no evidence of damage as a result of exposure to the extreme temperatures speoified.herein. 
--`,,```````,`,,`,``,``,,,,`,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---

1.4 Magnetic Effect: The magnetic effect of the Type II indicator shall be 
determined in terms of the deflection of a free magnet, approximately li inches 
long in a magnetic field with a horizontal intensity of 0.18 (0.01) gauss 
when the indicator is held in various positions on an east-west line with its 
.nearest part ~2 inches from the center of the magn~t. This test B~all first 
be made with the indicator not operating and then shall be repeated with the 
indicator in normal operation 
•. 
The. maximum deflection of the free magnet 
shall not exceed 5 degrees for a~ 
pointer or dial position. 
Humidity: 
The instrument (indioator,transmitter, amplifier, eto.) shall be mounted in a chamber maintained at a temperature of 70 + 2 C and a relative humidity of 95 + 5% for a period of six hours. After tnis period 'the heat shall be shut olf and the instrument shall be allowed to cool for a period of 18 hours in this. atmosphere in which the humidity rises to 100% as the temperature decreases to not more than 38 C. 

This complete oycle. shall be conducted: 

a. Five timeS for components located in uncontrolled temperature areae. 
b. Once for components located in controlled temperature areas. 
Immediately after recycling, there shall be no evidenoe of damage or corrosion . 

which affects performance, following this test, and the instrument shall meet the requirements of Section 6, except for Paragraph 6.8. 

## 7.6 Vibration:

Resonanoe - The instrument, while operating, shall be subjeoted to a resonant frequency survey of the appropriate range specified in Paragraph 3.3.3 in order to determine if there exists any resonant frequenoies of the parts. 

The amplitude used may be any oonvenient value that does not exoeed the maximum double amplitude and the maximum aooeleration·specified in . 

Paragraph 3.3.3. 

The instrument shall then be subjected to a vibration at the appropriate maximum double amplitude or maximum acoeleration speoified in Paragraph 3.3.3 
at the resonant frequency for a period of one hour. in each axis or with oircular motion vibration, whichever is applicable. \ihen more than one resonant frequency is encountered with vibration applied along anyone axis, a test period may be accomplished at the most severe resonance, or the period m~ 
be divided among resonant frequenoies, Whichever shall be considered most likely to produce failure. The test period shall not be less than one-half hour at any resonant mode. When resonant frequenoies are not apparent within the specified frequency range, the instrument shall be Vibrated for two hours in aocordance with the vibration requirements schedule (Paragraph 3.3.3) at the maximum double amplitude and the frequency to provide the maximum acceleration. 

Cycling - The instrument, while operating, shall be tested with the frequency cycled between limits specified in Paragraph 3.3.3 in 15 minute cycles for a period of one hour in each axis at an applied double amplitude specified in Paragraph 3.3.3, or an acceleration specified in Paragraph 3.3.3 
Whichever is the limiting value or a total of three hours for circular motion vibration, whichever is applioable. 

The instrument shall be tested during vibration to determine that it is functioning properly. After the completion qf this vibration test, no dam~ge shall be evident and the instrument shall meet the requirements of S~ction 6 (other than Paragraph 6.8). 

.- .. ------------------' 
--`,,```````,`,,`,``,``,,,,`,`-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---