(b) 
High Temperature - The instrument shall be subjected to the tests of DO-160, 
paragraph 4.5.1 and 4.5.2. 
During the test, paragraph 4.5.1, the instrument shall 
operate electrically and mechanically and there shall be no evidence of materials such 
as potting and sealing compounds exuding or dripping from the instrument. 
When 
subjected to the tests of paragraph 4.5.2, the instrument shall operate electrically 
and mechanically and the requirements of paragraph 5.1 of this Standard shall be 
met. 
Following the test, the requirements of paragarph 4,0 of this Standard shall 
be met 
at standard conditions. 
(ce) 
Altitude 
- The instrument shall be subjected to the tests of DO-160, paragraphs 4.6.1, 
4.6.2, and 4.6.3. 
During the test, paragraph 4.6.1, the instrument shall operate 
electrically and mechanically and the requirements of paragraph 5.1 of this Standard 
shall be met. 
After being subjected to the tests of paragraph 4.6.2, 
the requirements 
of paragraph 4.0 of this 
Standard shall be met 
at standard conditions, and after being 
subjected to the tests of paragraph 4.6.3, the requirements of paragraph 4,0 shall be 
met. 
(d) 
Humidity 
- The instrument shall be subjected to the tests of DO-160, paragraph 6.0. 
After the instrument 
is subjected to the appropriate tests of paragraph 6.0, 
it shall 
meet the requirements of paragraph 4.0 of this Standard at standard conditions. 
5.3 
Shock: 
The instrument shall be subjected to the tests of DO~-160, paragraphs 
7.1 and 
7.2. 
(a) 
After the instrument 
is subjected to the tests of paragraph 7.1, 
it shall meet the 
requirements of paragraph 4.0 of this Standard under standard conditions. 
(b) 
Following the tests of paragraph 7.2, the instrument or dummy load shall have remained in its mounting and no parts of the instrument or its mounting base become 
detached and free of the shock tested equipment. 
5.4 
Vibration: 
The instrument shall be subjected to the tests of DO-160, paragraph 8.2. 
During 
the test, 
it shall operate electrically and mechanically and the requirements of paragraph 5.1 
shall be met. 
Following the test, 
the requirements of paragraph 4.0 of this Standard shall be 
met, at standard conditions. 

## 5.5 Power Input:

(a) 
Normal Electrical Input Varaition Test 
1. 
The instrument shall be subjected to the tests.of DO-160, paragraph 16.3.1. 
During the test, 
it shall meet the requirements of paragraph 5.1 of this 
Standard. 
2,. 
The instrument shall be subjected to the tests of DO-160, paragraph 16.3.2. 
During the test, 
it shall meet the requirements of paragraph 5.1 of this Standard, 
(b) 
Abnormal Electrical Input Variations Test 
1. 
The instrument shall be subjected to the tests of DO-160, paragraph 16.3.3. 
During the test, 
it shall operate electrically and mechanically, and degradation 
of performance is permissible. 
There shall be no evidence of the presence of 
fire 
or smoke during the test of paragraph 16.3.3.2. 
After returning to normal 
input 
it shall meet the requirements of paragraph 4.0 of this Standard. 